RBI/2018-19/04 DCM(FNVD)G – 1/16.01.05/2018-19 July 2, 2018 The Chairman/ Managing Director /Chief Executive Officer All Banks and Director of Treasuries of all States Dear Sir / Madam, Master Circular – Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Notes Please refer to the Master Circular DCM(FNVD)G - 4/16.01.05/2017-18 dated July 20, 2017 consolidating the instructions issued till July 20, 2017, relating to Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Notes. The Master Circular has since been updated by incorporating the instructions issued till date and has been placed on the RBI website www.rbi.org.in. The Master Circular is a compilation of the instructions issued by RBI on the above subject which are operational as on the date of this Circular. Yours faithfully, (Manas Ranjan Mohanty) Chief General Manager Encl: Master Circular INDEX

CONTENTS Para No Particulars 1 Authority to Impound Counterfeit Notes 2 Detection of Counterfeit Notes 3 Impounding of Counterfeit Notes 4 Issue of Receipt to tenderer 5 Detection of Counterfeit Notes – Reporting to Police and other bodies 6 Examination of Banknotes Before Issuing over Counters, Feeding ATMs and Remitting to Issue Offices of RBI 7 Designating Nodal Bank Officer 8 Establishment of Forged Notes Vigilance Cell at Head Office of Banks 9 Provision of Ultra – Violet Lamps and other Infrastructure 10 Reporting of Data to RBI / Government 11 Preservation of Counterfeit Notes Received from Police Authorities 12 Detection of Counterfeit Notes – Training of Staff Annex I Annex II Annex III Annex IV Annex V Annex VI Annex VII Annex VIII 1 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA DEPARTMENT OF CURRENCY MANAGEMENT MASTER CIRCULAR – 2018-19 Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Notes Para 1- Authority to Impound Counterfeit Notes The Counterfeit Notes can be impounded by-

(i) All Banks (ii) All Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. (iii) Issue Offices of Reserve Bank of India. Para 2 - Detection of Counterfeit Notes Banknotes tendered over the counter should be examined for authenticity through machines. Similarly, banknotes received directly at the back office / currency chest through bulk tenders should also be examined through machines. No credit to customer’s account is to be given for Counterfeit Notes, if any, detected in the tender received over the counter or at the back-office / currency chest. In no case, the Counterfeit Notes should be returned to the tenderer or destroyed by the bank branches / treasuries. Failure of the banks to impound Counterfeit Notes detected at their end will be construed as wilful involvement of the bank concerned in circulating Counterfeit Notes and penalty will be imposed. Para 3 - Impounding of Counterfeit Notes Notes determined as counterfeit shall be stamped as "COUNTERFEIT NOTE" and impounded in the prescribed format (Annex I). Each such impounded note shall be recorded under authentication, in a separate register. Para 4 - Issue of Receipt to Tenderer When a banknote tendered at the counter of a bank branch/back office and currency chest or treasury is found to be counterfeit, an acknowledgement receipt in the prescribed format (Annex II) must be issued to the tenderer, after stamping the note as in Paragraph 3 ibid. The receipt, in running serial numbers, should be authenticated by the cashier and tenderer. Notice to this effect should be displayed prominently at the offices / branches for information of the public. The receipt is to be issued even in cases where the tenderer is unwilling to countersign it. 2 Para 5 - Detection of Counterfeit Notes - Reporting to Police and other bodies The following procedure should be followed while reporting incidence of detection of Counterfeit Note to the Police: For cases of detection of Counterfeit Notes up to 4 pieces, in a single transaction, a consolidated report in the prescribed format (Annex III) should be sent by the Nodal Bank Officer to the police authorities or the Nodal Police Station, along with the suspect Counterfeit Notes, at the end of the month. For cases of detection of Counterfeit Notes of 5 or more pieces, in a single transaction, the Counterfeit Notes should be forwarded immediately by the Nodal Bank Officer to the local police authorities or the Nodal Police Station for investigation by filing FIR in the prescribed format (Annex IV). A copy of the monthly consolidated report / FIR shall be sent to the Forged Note Vigilance Cell constituted at the Head Office of the bank (only in the case of banks), and in the case of the treasury, it should be sent to the Issue Office of the Reserve Bank concerned. Acknowledgement of the police authorities concerned has to be obtained for note/s forwarded to them both as consolidated monthly statement and for filing of FIR. If the Counterfeit Notes are sent to the police by insured post, acknowledgement of receipt thereof by the police should be invariably obtained and kept on record. A proper follow-up of receipt of acknowledgement from the police authorities is necessary. In case, any difficulty is faced by the Offices / Branches due to reluctance of the police to receive monthly consolidated statement / file FIRs, the matter may be sorted out in consultation with the Nodal Officer of the police authority designated to coordinate matters relating to investigation of Counterfeit Banknotes cases. The list of Nodal Police Station may be obtained from the respective Regional Office of the Reserve Bank of India. In order to facilitate identification of people abetting circulation of Counterfeit Notes, banks are advised to cover the banking hall/area and counters under CCTV surveillance and recording and preserve the recording. Banks should also monitor the patterns / trends of such detection and suspicious trends / patterns should be brought to the notice of RBI / Police authorities immediately. The progress made by banks in detection and reporting of Counterfeit Notes to Police, RBI, etc. and problems thereof, should be discussed regularly in the meetings of various State Level Committees viz. State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC), Standing Committee on Currency Management (SCCM), State Level Security Committee (SLSC) etc. 3 The data on detection of counterfeit Indian notes at bank branches and treasuries should be included in the monthly Returns forwarded to the Reserve Bank Issue Offices as indicated in para 10 below. The definition of 'counterfeiting' in the Indian Penal Code covers currency notes issued by a foreign government authority as well. In case of suspected foreign currency note received for opinion from the police and government agencies, etc., they should be advised to forward the case to the Interpol Wing of the CBI, New Delhi after prior consultation with them. The Government of India has framed Investigation of High Quality Counterfeit Indian Currency Offences Rules, 2013 under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA),

1967. The Third Schedule of the Act defines High Quality Counterfeit Indian Currency Note. Activity of production, smuggling or circulation of High Quality Counterfeit Indian Notes has been brought under the ambit of UAPA, 1967. Para 6 - Examination of the Banknotes before Issuing over Counters, Feeding ATMs and Remitting to Issue Offices of the Reserve Bank The banks should re-align their cash management in such a manner so as to ensure that cash receipts in the denominations of ₹100 and above are not put into re- circulation without the notes being machine processed for authenticity. The said instructions shall be applicable to all bank branches, irrespective of the volume of daily cash receipt. Any non-compliance will be construed as violation of the instructions issued by the Reserve Bank. In order to obviate complaints regarding receipt of Counterfeit Notes through ATMs, and to curb circulation of counterfeits, it is imperative to put in place adequate safeguards / checks before loading ATMs with notes. Dispensation of Counterfeit Notes through the ATMs would be construed as an attempt to circulate the Counterfeit Notes by the bank concerned. Detection of counterfeits in chest remittances is also liable to be construed as wilful involvement of the chest branches concerned in circulating Counterfeit Notes and may attract special investigation by police authorities, and other action like suspending the operation of the chest concerned. Penalty at 100% of the notional value of Counterfeit Notes, in addition to the recovery of loss to the extent of the notional value of such notes, will be imposed under the following circumstances: a) When Counterfeit Notes are detected in the soiled note remittance of the bank. 4 b) If Counterfeit Notes are detected in the currency chest balance of a bank during Inspection / Audit by RBI. In terms of circular No.DPSS.CO.PD 2298/02.10.002/2011-12 dated June 20, 2012, the responsibility of ensuring the quality and genuineness of cash loaded at White Label ATMs would be that of the Sponsor Bank. In terms of Circular No. DPSS.CO.PD.No.1621/02.10.002/2016-17 dated December 30, 2016, when sourced from retail outlets, the White Label ATM Operator shall be solely responsible for the quality and genuineness of currency notes dispensed through ATMs. Para 7 - Designating Nodal Bank Officer Each bank should designate a Nodal Bank Officer, district-wise and notify the same to the Regional Office of RBI concerned and Police Authorities. All cases of reporting of Counterfeit Note detection as indicated in Para 5 should be done through the Nodal Bank Officer. The Nodal Bank Officer will also serve as the contact point for all Counterfeit Note detection related activities. Para 8 - Establishment of Forged Notes Vigilance Cell at Head Office of Bank Each bank shall establish at its Head Office, a Forged Note Vigilance (FNV) Cell to undertake the following functions: i. Dissemination of instructions issued by the Reserve Bank on Counterfeit Notes to bank’s branches. Monitoring the implementation of these instructions. Compilation of data on detection of Counterfeit Notes, and its submission to Reserve Bank, FIU-IND and National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) as per extant instructions. Follow-up of cases of Counterfeit Notes, with police authorities / designated nodal officer. ii. Sharing of the information thus compiled with bank’s CVO and report to him / her all cases of acceptance / issue of Counterfeit Notes over the counters. iii. Conducting periodic surprise checks at currency chests where shortages / defective / Counterfeit Notes etc. are detected. iv. Ensuring operation of Note Sorting Machines of appropriate capacity at all the currency chests / back offices and closely monitoring the detection of Counterfeit Notes and maintaining the record of the same. Ensuring that only properly sorted and machine examined banknotes are fed into the ATMs / issued over the counters and to put in place adequate safeguards, including surprise checks, both during the processing and in transit of notes. FNV Cell shall submit status report on a quarterly basis covering the aforesaid aspects to the Chief General Manager, Department of Currency Management, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Amar Building, Fourth Floor, Sir P. M. Road, Fort, Mumbai 400 001 / to (email) and to the Issue office of the Regional office of Reserve Bank under whose jurisdiction the FNV Cell is functioning, within a fortnight from the conclusion of the quarter under report. The said report should be sent by 5 email. No hard copy need be sent. In order to update the record of the addresses of the FNV Cells, the bank shall furnish by e-mail, in the prescribed format (Annex V), the address etc. particulars to the Reserve Bank every year, as on 1st July. No hard copy need be sent. Para 9 - Provision of Ultra-Violet Lamp and Other Infrastructure With a view to facilitating the detection of Counterfeit Notes, all bank branches / identified back offices should be equipped with ultra-violet lamps / other appropriate banknote sorting / detection machines. In addition, all currency chest branches should be equipped with verification, processing and sorting machines and should be used to their optimum capacity. Such machines should conform to the guidelines on 'Note Authentication and Fitness Sorting Parameters' prescribed by the Reserve Bank in May 2010. The banks shall maintain a daily record of the notes processed through the Note Sorting machines, including the number of counterfeits detected. The banks should also consider providing at least one counting machine (with dual display facility) for public use at the counter. Para 10 - Reporting of Data to RBI / NCRB / FIU-IND By All Bank branches Data on Counterfeit Notes detected by all the branches of the bank shall be reported in the prescribed format, on a monthly basis. A statement (Annex VI) showing the details of Counterfeit Notes detected in the bank branches during the month shall be compiled and forwarded to the Issue Office of Reserve Bank concerned so as to reach them by 7th of the next month. Under Rule 3 of Prevention of Money Laundering Rules, 2005, Principal Officers of banks are also required to report information on cash transactions where forged notes have been used as genuine note to The Director, FIU-IND, Financial Intelligence Unit- India, 6th Floor, Hotel Samrat, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi-110021, within seven working days, by uploading the information on the FINnet Portal. Similarly, data on FICN detection is also to be uploaded on the web-enabled software of National Crime Records Bureau, New Delhi at their website. A “nil “report may be sent in case no counterfeit has been detected during the month. 6 Para 11- Preservation of Counterfeit Notes Received from Police Authorities All Counterfeit Notes received back from the police authorities / courts may be carefully preserved in the safe custody of the bank and a record thereof be maintained by the branch concerned. FNV Cell of the bank shall also maintain a branch-wise consolidated record of such Counterfeit Notes. These Counterfeit Notes at branches should be subjected to verification on a half- yearly basis (on 31st March and 30th September) by the Officer-in-Charge of the bank office concerned. They should be preserved for a period of three years from the date of receipt from the police authorities. They may thereafter be sent to the Issue Office of Reserve Bank of India concerned with full details. Counterfeit Notes, which are the subject matter of litigation in the court of law should be preserved with the branch concerned for three years after conclusion of the court case. Para 12 - Detection of Counterfeit Notes - Training of Staff It is necessary to ensure that the cash handling staff in banks and treasuries / sub- treasuries are fully conversant with the security features of a banknote. With a view to educating the branch staff on detection of Counterfeit Notes, the design and security features of all the banknotes shown in Annex VII have been supplied to all the banks / treasuries with instructions to display them prominently at the branches for information of the public. Posters of the 2005-06 series of banknotes have also been supplied to bank branches for display at the branches. Details of security features of the New Design banknotes of ` 2000, ` 500, ` 200 and ` 50 are available at the link https://www.paisaboltahai.rbi.org.in/ Details of other banknotes are also available under ‘Know your Banknotes’ at the above link. The Controlling Offices / Training Centers should also organise / conduct training programmes on the security features of banknotes for members of staff to enable detection of Counterfeit Notes at the point of receipt itself. The banks should ensure that all bank personnel handling cash are trained on features of genuine Indian bank notes. The Reserve Bank will also provide faculty support and training materials. 7 Annex I (Paragraph 3) Each banknote, which, on examination of various security features / parameters, is determined as a counterfeit one, shall be branded with a stamp "COUNTERFEIT BANKNOTE". For this purpose, a stamp with a uniform size of 5 cm x 5 cm with the following inscription may be used.

COUNTERFEIT BANKNOTE IMPOUNDED BANK / TREASURY/ SUB-TREASURY BRANCH / CURRENCY CHEST SIGNATURE DATE 8 Annex II (Paragraph 4) Format – Acknowledgement Receipt to be issued to the tenderer of Counterfeit Notes Name of the Bank / Treasury/ Sub-treasury: Address: Serial Number of the Receipt: ________ Date: __________ The note (s) described below received from……………………………. (Name and Address of the tenderer) is/are counterfeit and has/have therefore been impounded and stamped accordingly. Serial number of Denomination Parameters on which the note is the note deemed deemed as counterfeit as counterfeit Total number of Counterfeit Notes: (Signature of the Tenderer) (Signature of the counter staff) (Official Seal) 9 Annex III (Paragraph 5) Date: _____________ Consolidated Monthly Reporting for the month of ________ 1. Name of the Bank / District: 2. Name and Address of the Nodal Officer: 3. Detail of Counterfeit Notes: Date of Name of Details of Denominations Security Unique detection branch / tenderer / pieces / serial features Reference currency numbers breached Number chest (URN) generated by the NCRB Portal 4. The Counterfeit Notes are enclosed.

5. Kindly acknowledge receipt. (Authorised signatory) (Official Seal) Encl: 10 Annex- IV (Paragraph 5) Date: _____________ Name of the Bank: District: Name and Address of the Nodal Bank Officer: Ref. No. ………… The Sr. Inspector of Police ___________Police Station, Dear Sir, Detection of Counterfeit Note/s – Request for investigation We enclose the following Counterfeit Notes detected in our office on ________. The details of the Counterfeit Notes are furnished below.

2. As the printing and/or circulation of forged Indian Currency Notes is an offence under Sections 489A to 489E of the Indian Penal Code, we request you to lodge FIR and conduct the necessary investigation. In case it is decided to file criminal proceedings in the court of law, you may first arrange to send the notes to any of the Note Printing Presses, Forensic Science Laboratories etc. in terms of the provisions of Section 292(1) and 292(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure for examination. The expert opinion furnished may be produced in the court as evidence under Section 292 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The forged notes may please be returned to us after the completion of the investigation and/or proceedings in the court of law along with the detailed report of the investigation / decision of the court. Denomination / Serial Notional Details Name & Bank’s Unique No. of pieces number of Value of address of Entry Reference Counterfeit tenderer the branch No. Number Note /currency (URN) chest where generated in detection the NCRB took place Portal 3. The Counterfeit Notes are enclosed.

4. Please acknowledge receipt. Yours faithfully, Authorised Signatory Official Seal Encl: 11 Annex V (Paragraph 8) FORMAT FOR FURNISHING ADDRESS ETC. PARTICULARS OF FORGED NOTE VIGILANCE CELL (FNVC) TO RBI (TO BE FURNISHED BY E-MAIL ON 1ST JULY EVERY YEAR) NAME ADDRESS OF NAME AND TELEPHONE NO FAX NO. E-mail OF THE FNVC (WITH DESIGNATION OF (WITH CODE). (WITH Address of BANK PIN CODE) OFFICER-IN- CODE) the FNVC

CHARGE We note to intimate immediately the changes, if any, in the particulars furnished above Name of Authorised Official: Designation Date: NB: The completed format, in MS-Excel, should be transmitted by e-mail, to the following address- E-mail (No hard copy need be sent) 12 Annex VI (Paragraph 10) Date: _______________ Name of the bank / District: Statement showing the details of Counterfeit Banknotes detected in the _______________ during the month of _______________ A. Details of Counterfeit Notes detected: Name Type of detection Denomination-wise Details in pieces Total of pieces branch 10 20 50 100 200 500 500 1000 2000 / Old New curren cy chest FIR (FICN pieces ) Non-FIR (FICN pieces) Total Pieces of banknotes processed B) Details of FIR cases filed with police: Pending with Sent to Returned Pending with Police at the Police by the the Police at beginning of during Police the end of the the month the during month (Cumulative month the (Cumulative Total) month Total) No. of cases* where FIR was filed Total pieces of FICN involved in all the cases of FIR * Each FIR lodged comprises one case. . Forwarded to: -

1. The General Manager/Deputy General Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Issue Department, ____________ (Signature) Name & Designation of the Authorised Official Official Seal 13 Annex VII (Paragraph 12) Designs of Bank Notes Issued by the Reserve Bank of India since 1967 Year Size Watermark Front Back I.`10 notes 1967 137 x Ashoka Pillar Purple colour. Numeral 10 in the centre. Value of the note in 14 63 languages. The oval seascape mm with country craft. 1968 -do- -do- Blue-black colour. Promise clause, guarantee -do- clause and signature printed in bilingual. RBI’s name in Hindi added. 1969 -do- -do- Blue Black colour. ‘Ten Rupees’ instead of Mahatma Gandhi’s Portrait. ‘Rupees Ten’. 1970 -do- Ashoka Pillar Hindi version of RBI incorporated in place of Bilingual seal incorporated with spinning English and vice versa. Hindi rendering of wheels. Guarantee clause, promise clause and Governor’s signature have been interchanged. सत्यमेव जयत े incorporated. Watermark window and numbering panel enlarged. 1975 -do- -do- Dark brown, umber and blue colour. Numeral Pale brown, Ochre blue and ‘10’ printed in dark brown. Intaglio printing. green colour. A circle with two Languages scroll on left and Ashoka Pillar Peacocks on branch of a tree. emblem on right. Deer, horses, bird and lotus. 1992 -do- -do- Overall colour scheme in pale pink, magenta Shalimar garden and yellow 1996 -do- Portrait of Overall colour scheme in mauve brown, Intricate guilloche and floral Mahatma orange and pink. Portrait of Mahatma Gandhi. patterns with profiles of an Gandhi with Embedded security thread containing the elephant, rhinoceros and tiger’s multidirection words 'भारत RBI’ readable on both sides when faces. Value of note in 15 Indian al lines in the held against light. languages. watermark window. 2006 -do- The portrait Machine readable windowed demetalised Year of printing is incorporated at of Mahatma clear text magnetic security thread with the printing stage on the reverse Gandhi, the inscriptions 'Bharat' (in Hindi) and RBI which of the banknote. multidirection fluoresces in yellow on both sides under UV al lines, and light. (Generic). an Width: 1.4 mm electrotype Dual coloured optical fibres. mark The small floral design printed both on the showing the front (hollow) and back (filled up) of the note denomination in the middle of the vertical band next to the al numeral 10 Watermark has an accurate back-to-back appear in this registration so that the numeral appears as section and one when seen against the light. these can be viewed better when the banknote is held against light. 2011 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to In addition, ` symbol was introduced on the have year of printing on the obverse of the banknote, on the top left and reverse. In addition, ` symbol was 14 top right corner (along with the introduced on the reverse of the denominational numeral). banknotes, on the top left and top right corner (along with the denominational numeral). 2016 -do- -do- -do- In addition, the numerals in both the number panels of these banknotes will be in ascending size from left to right, while the first three alphanumeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size 2018 63 ₹ 10 The base colour of the note is Chocolate The new denomination has motif mm x denomination Brown. The note has other designs, of Sun Temple, Konark on the 123 banknotes in geometric patterns aligning with the overall reverse, depicting the country's mm the Mahatma colour scheme, both at the obverse and cultural heritage. Year of printing Gandhi reverse. of the note on the left, Swachh (New) Series having See through register with denominational Bharat logo with slogan, Language panel, Mahatma numeral 10 Denominational numeral १० in Gandhi Devnagari, Portrait of Mahatma Gandhi at the Denominational numeral १० in portrait and centre, Micro letters 'RBI', ‘भारत ', ‘INDIA' and Devnagari. electrotype '10', Windowed demetalised security thread (10) with inscriptions ‘भारत’ and RBI, watermarks Guarantee Clause, Governor's signature with Promise Clause and RBI emblem towards right of Mahatma Gandhi portrait, Ashoka Pillar emblem on the right, Number panel with numerals growing from small to big on the top left side and bottom right side. II. `.20 notes 1972 147X6 Ashoka Pillar Saffron colour. Ashoka Pillar emblem on the Bold lettering in Hindi appears 3mm right and language panel on the left side. centrally in a horizontal panel, flanked by figures 20 at the corner. Picture of Parliament House. On the left value in Indian languages. 1975 -do- Small Ashoka Red, blue, mauve and pale yellow colour. Dry offset printing. Red, blue and Pillar with Numerical 20 in dark mauve on a light yellow mauve colour. Chariot wheel of chain of lotus shaped design. Language scroll on the Konark Sun temple at the centre. spinning left and Ashoka Pillar emblem on right. The Watermark window in pale blue is wheels. printing bleeds off on all sides but not in surrounded by an ornamental Resin treated corners, which are paper white. Bilingual design in perfect register with paper names, clauses and signature. corresponding design on obverse of the note. 2001 -do- Mahatma The security thread totally embedded with the The central theme depicts the Gandhi letters "Bharat" (in Hindi) and "RBI" The Indian coastal line with coconut Portrait colour is predominantly reddish orange. The grooves. The value of the note Ashoka Pillar has been replaced by the appears in 15 languages in a Mahatma Gandhi's Portrait in dark red while vertical panel in the left hand the Ashoka Pillar has been shifted to the left side. side bottom corner and the size is smaller. The numeral 20, RBI seal, Mahatma Gandhi's Portrait, RBI Legend, Guarantee and Promise clauses, Governor's Signature and Ashoka Pillar inset are in intaglio. The words RBI and 15 the numeral 20 in Micro letters appear alternatively behind the Mahatma Gandhi's Portrait. An identification mark by way of a small vertical rectangle in raised form appears on the left side of the note to facilitate the visually impaired to identify the denomination of the note. The numbers in the number panel are printed in red. 2006 -do- The portrait Machine readable windowed demetalised Year of printing is incorporated at of Mahatma clear text magnetic security thread with the printing stage on the reverse Gandhi, the inscriptions 'Bharat' (in Hindi) and RBI which of the banknote. multidirection fluoresces in yellow on both sides under UV al lines, and light (Generic). an Width: 1.4 mm electrotype Dual coloured optical fibres. mark The small floral design printed both on the showing the front (hollow) and back (filled up) of the note denomination in the middle of the vertical band next to the al numeral 20 Watermark has an accurate back-to-back appear in this registration so that the numeral appears as section and one when seen against the light. these can be viewed better when the banknote is held against light 2012 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to In addition, ` symbol was introduced on the have year of printing on the obverse of the banknote, on the top left and reverse. In addition, ` symbol was top right corner (along with the introduced on the reverse of the denominational numeral). banknotes, on the top left and top right corner (along with the denominational numeral). 2016 -do- -do- The numerals in both the number panels will -do- be in ascending size from left to right while the first three alpha-numeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size. The numeral “20”, RBI seal, Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait, RBI legend, Guarantee and promise clause, Governor’s signature, Ashoka Pillar emblem which were hitherto printed in intaglio (raised printing) are now being printed in offset (without any raised printing). Further, rectangular identification mark on the left of the banknote has been removed. While there is no change in the colour at the reverse, the colour at the obverse is lighter (due to removal of intaglio printing). The vertical band on the right side of the Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait hitherto contained a latent image showing the denominational numeral “20”.The latent image was visible only when the banknote was held horizontally at eye level. This feature is no longer present. III. `50 notes 16 1975 147X7 Ashoka Pillar Mauve colour with hues of blue green and Mauve, brown and yellow colours. 3mm with chain of purple. Numeral 50 in dark brown. Language Parliament House at the centre. wheels. scroll on left and Ashoka Pillar emblem on Watermark window in pale right. Printing bleeds off on all sides except mauve, surrounded by an at corners. ornamental design, which is in perfect register with corresponding design on the obverse. 1981 -do- -do- Intaglio-fast blue, yellow red. Ashoka Pillar Dry offset-yellowish brown and and languages in deep violet colours, rest in body in deep purple colour. deep green and brown colours. सत्यमवे जयत े Parliament House with National below Ashoka Pillar emblem. flag on top 1997 -do- Portrait of Yellow, blue and violet colour. Ashoka Pillar A panoramic view of India’s Mahatma replaced by Mahatma Gandhi Portrait in blue. Parliament House with floral Gandhi with Security thread totally embedded inside the patterns above and filigree multidirection note the letters ‘भारत’ and 'RBI’. A small black patterns on the sides. The value al lines in the solid square on the left hand side of the of the note in 15 Indian window. watermark to help the visually impaired to languages. identify the denomination of the note. 2005 -do- The portrait Machine readable windowed demetalised Year of printing is incorporated at of Mahatma clear text magnetic security thread with the printing stage on the reverse Gandhi, the inscriptions `Bharat’ (in Hindi) and RBI which of the banknote. multidirection fluoresces in yellow on both sides under al lines, and U.V.light –width 1.4 mm. The Intaglio Printing an i.e. raised prints is more prominent in the electrotype name of the Bank in Hindi and English, the mark Reserve Bank Seal, guarantee and promise showing the clause, Ashoka Pillar Emblem on the left, RBI denomination Governor’s signature. A square in intaglio on al numeral 50 the left of the watermark window with appear in this increased depth of engraving helps the section and visually impaired to identify the denomination. these can be Optical fibres are in dual colour. The small viewed better floral design printed both on the front (hollow) when the and back (filled up) of the banknote in the banknote is middle of the vertical band next to the held against watermark window has an accurate back-to- light back registration so that the numeral appears as one when seen against the light. 2012 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to In addition, ` symbol was introduced on the have year of printing on the obverse of the banknote, on the top left and reverse. In addition, ` symbol was top right corner (along with the introduced on the reverse of the denominational numeral). banknotes, on the top left and top right corner (along with the denominational numeral). 2015 -do- -do- -do- -do- In addition, the numerals in both the number panels of these banknotes will be in ascending size from left to right, while the first three alphanumeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size 2016 -do- - do- The numeral ‘50’, RBI seal, Mahatma -do- Gandhi’s portrait, RBI legend, Guarantee and 17 promise clause, Governor’s signature, Ashoka Pillar emblem which were hitherto printed in intaglio (raised printing) are now being printed in offset (without any raised printing). Further, square-shaped identification mark on the left of the banknote has been removed. While there is no change in the colour at the reverse, the colour at the obverse is lighter (due to removal of intaglio printing). The vertical band on the right side of the Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait hitherto contained a latent image showing the denominational numeral ’50’. The latent image was visible only when the banknote was held horizontally at eye level. This feature is no longer present. 2017 66 The base colour of the note is Fluorescent Year of printing of the note on the mm x ₹ 50 Blue. left, Swachh Bharat logo with 135 denomination slogan, Language panel, Motif of See through register with denominational mm banknotes in Hampi with Chariot, numeral 50, Denominational numeral ५० in the Mahatma Denominational numeral ५० in Devnagari, Portrait of Mahatma Gandhi at the Gandhi Devnagari. centre, Micro letters ‘RBI’, ‘भारत’, ‘INDIA’ and (New) Series ‘50’, Windowed demetalised security thread having Mahatma with inscriptions ‘भारत’ and RBI, Gandhi Guarantee Clause, Governor’s signature with portrait and Promise Clause and RBI emblem towards electrotype right of Mahatma Gandhi portrait, (50) Ashoka Pillar emblem on the right, watermarks Mahatma Gandhi portrait and electrotype (50) watermarks, Number panel with numerals growing from small to big on the top left side and bottom right side. IV ` 100 notes 1967 157X7 Ashoka Pillar Blue colour. Numeral 100 appears Vertical panel of 14 Indian 3mm prominently in centre. Ashoka Pillar emblem languages on left. Hirakud Dam in on the right. the background in a circular frame. 1969 -do- -do- Blue colour and promise clause, Guarantee Picture of Mahatma Gandhi in a clause and Governor's signature in bilingual. sitting posture with Sevagram Ashram in the background in a circular frame. 1975 -do- Ashoka Pillar Intaglio deep blue with hues of blue, brown, Intaglio deep blue and brown with spinning pink and dark green. Numeral 100 in dark shade of corn, agricultural wheels. blue. Watermark window light blue. RBI's operations, Tea plantation and name, promise clause, Guarantee clause and hydroelectric power project. Governor's signature in bilingual. Language ‘Watermark’ window is scroll on left and Ashoka Pillar emblem on surrounded by an ornamental right. Printing bleeds off on all sides except at design, which is in perfect register corners. with similar design on the obverse. 1979 -do- -do- One side intaglio blue, red and deep green, Dry-offset. Black and maroon Tints of reddish and yellowish green shade. colours. Tint design in greenish सत्यमेव जयते below Ashoka Pillar emblem. blue and brownish shades. 18 1996 -do- Portrait of Printed with the combination of offset and Central theme depicts a Mahatma intaglio process. overall colour is panoramic view of the Gandhi with predominantly blue, grey and green. Portrait Kanchangunga range with floral multidirection of Mahatma Gandhi. A windowed security patterns above and filigree al lines in the thread partly visible from the front but totally patterns on the sides. The value watermark embedded inside. Letters ‘भारत’ and ‘RBI’ of note appears in 15 languages window. on the left hand side. printed on the thread. A small black solid triangle in intaglio on left hand side of the watermark to help the visually

 impaired to identify the denomination of the note. 2005 -do- The portrait Machine-readable windowed demetalised Year of printing is incorporated at of Mahatma clear text magnetic security thread with the printing stage on the reverse Gandhi, the inscriptions ‘Bharat’ (in Hindi) and RBI on of the banknote. multidirection notes of Rs.100 with exclusive colour shift. al lines, and Colour of the thread shall shift from green to an blue when viewed from different angles. It will electrotype fluoresce in yellow on the reverse and the text mark will fluoresce on the obverse under U.V.light – showing the width – 2 m.m. denomination The Intaglio Printing i.e. raised prints is more al numeral prominent in the name of the Bank in Hindi 100 appear in and English, the Reserve Bank Seal, this section guarantee and promise clause, Ashoka Pillar and these Emblem on the left, RBI Governor’s signature. can be A triangle in intaglio on the left of the viewed better watermark window with increased depth of when the engraving helps the visually impaired to banknote is identify the denomination. Optical fibres are in held against dual colour. The small floral design printed light. both on the front (hollow) and back(filled up) of the banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the watermark window has an accurate back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one when seen against the light. 2011 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to In addition, ` symbol was introduced on the have year of printing on the obverse of the banknotes, on the top left and reverse. In addition, ` symbol was top right corner (along with the introduced on the reverse of the denominational numeral). banknotes on the top left and top right corner (along with the denominational numeral). 2015 -do- -do- -do- -do- In addition, the numerals in both the number panels of these banknotes will be in ascending size from left to right, while the first three alphanumeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size. In addition, easy to identify markings for visually impaired in the form of four angular bleed lines on both left and right of the 19 obverse side of banknotes. Increase in size of the identification mark (triangle) by 50 per cent. V. ` 200 Notes – Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series 2017 66 ₹ 200 The base colour of the note is Bright Yellow. Motif of Sanchi Stupa on the mm × denomination The note has other designs, geometric reverse, depicting the country’s 146 banknotes in patterns aligning with the overall colour cultural heritage. mm the Mahatma scheme, both at the obverse and reverse. Year of printing of the note on the Gandhi See through register with denominational left Swachh Bharat logo with (New) Series numeral 200 Latent image with slogan Language panel Motif of having denominational numeral 200 Denominational Sanchi Stupa Denominational Mahatma numeral २०० in Devnagari Portrait of numeral २०० in Devnagari Gandhi Mahatma Gandhi at the centre Micro letters Dimension portrait and ‘RBI’, ‘भारत’, ‘India’ and ‘200’ Windowed electrotype security thread with inscriptions ‘भारत’ and (200) RBI with colour shift. Colour of the thread watermarks changes from green to blue when the note is tilted Guarantee Clause, Governor’s signature with Promise Clause and RBI emblem towards right of Mahatma Gandhi portrait Denominational numeral with Rupee Symbol, ₹ 200 in colour changing ink (green to blue) on bottom right Ashoka Pillar emblem on the right Number panel with numerals growing from small to big on the top left side and bottom right side For visually impaired Intaglio or raised printing of Mahatma Gandhi portrait, Ashoka Pillar emblem, raised Identification mark H with micro-text ₹ 200, four angular bleed lines with two circles in between the lines both on the right and left sides VI. `500 notes – Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series 2016 66mm Mahatma Issued in the Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series, The new theme is the Indian x150 Gandhi the new ₹ 500 banknotes are different from heritage site Red Fort with the mm portrait and the earlier specified bank note (SBN) series in Indian flag. electrotype colour, size, theme, location of security The year of printing “2016” and (500) features and design elements. Swachh Bharat logo is printed on watermarks The colour of the note is stone grey. the reverse. The orientation and relative position of the The 15 language panel is towards Mahatma Gandhi portrait has changed. the centre. The banknote also has features (intaglio printing of Mahatma Gandhi portrait, Ashoka Pillar emblem, bleed lines, circle with ₹ 500 in the right, and the identification mark) which enable the visually impaired person to identify the denomination. VII. `2000/- notes – Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series 2016 66mm Mahatma Issued in the Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series. The salient features are : x 166 Gandhi The base colour of the note is magenta. The 1. Year of printing of the note on mm portrait and note has other designs, geometric patterns the left electrotype aligning with the overall colour scheme, both 2.Swachh Bharat logo with slogan (2000) at the obverse and reverse. 3.Language panel towards the watermarks. The salient features are : centre

1. See through register with denominational 4. Motif of Mangalayan depicting 20 numeral 2000 the country’s first venture into 2.Latent image with denominational numeral interplanetary space. 2000 5.Denominational numeral २००० 3.Denominational numeral २००० in Devnagari in Devnagari 4.Portrait of Mahatma Gandhi at the centre 5.Micro letters ‘RBI’ and ‘2000’ on the left side of the banknote 6. Windowed security thread with inscriptions ‘भारत’, RBI and 2000 on banknotes with colour shift. Colour of the thread changes from green to blue when the note is tilted 7.Guarantee Clause, Governor’s signature with Promise Clause and RBI emblem towards right 8.Denominational numeral with Rupee Symbol, ₹ 2000 in colour changing ink (green to blue) on bottom right 9.Ashoka Pillar emblem on the right Mahatma Gandhi portrait and electrotype (2000) watermarks 10. Number panel with numerals growing from small to big on the top left side and bottom right side. For visually impaired Intaglio or raised printing of Mahatma Gandhi portrait, Ashoka Pillar emblem, bleed lines and identity mark 11.Horizontal rectangle with ₹ 2000 in raised print on the right

12. Seven angular bleed lines on left and right side in raised print. 21 Annex VIII List of Circulars Consolidated in this Master Circular Para of S. No. Circular Ref. No. Date Subject Master Circular 1 DCM FNVD G 16/16.01.01/2003-04 18-Dec-03 Issue of Forged Notes through ATM Para 6 2 DCM FNVD G 31/16.01.01/2003-04 8-Apr-04 Detection of Forged Notes - Issue of receipt to Para 4 tenderers 3 DCM FNVD G 3/16.02.03/2004-05 6-Jul-04 Detection of Forged Notes - Issue of receipts Para 4 4 DCM FNVD G 23/16.01.01/2005-06 7-Dec-05 Issue of Counterfeit Banknotes through ATMs Para 6 – Constitution of Forged Note Vigilance Cell & 8 5 DCM FNVD G 37/16.08.08/2006-07 28-Mar-06 Detection of Counterfeit Banknotes at ATMs Para 6 of the banks & 8 6 DCM FNVD G 18/16.08.08/2006-07 1-Jun-07 Detection of Counterfeit Banknotes in chest Para 6 remittances received from banks 7 DCMNo.Dir.NPD.3158 /09.39.00/2009- 19-Nov-09 Sorting of Notes – Installation of Note Sorting Para 6 10 Machines 8 DCM.No.Cir.NPD. 3161/09.39.00 19-Nov-09 Sorting / Processing of Notes – Installation of Para 9 (Policy)/2009-2010 Note Sorting Machines 9 DCM(R&D)No.G-26/18.00.14/2009-10 11-May-10 Installation of Note Sorting Machines- Note Para 9 Authentication and Fitness Sorting Parameters 10 DCMFNVD No. 502/16.01.05/2011-12 25-Jul-11 Detection of Counterfeit Bank Notes – Revised Para 5 Procedure 11 DCM(FNV)No.5063/16.02.22/2011-12 9-May-12 Detection and Reporting Mechanism of Para 6 Counterfeit Notes – Monetary Policy 2012-13 12 DPSS CO.PD 2298/02.10.002/2011-12 20-Jun-12 White Label ATMs in India - Guidelines Para 6 13 DCMFNVD No.2165/16.21.005/2012-13 16-Nov-12 Detection and Reporting of Counterfeit Notes Para 6 – Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2012-13 14 DCMFNVD No.776/16.01.05/2015-16 26-Aug-15 Detection of Counterfeit Notes - Review Para 2 15 DCM FNVD No. 1134/16.01.05/2016-17 27-Oct-16 Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Para 5 Notes 16 DPSS.CO.PD.No.1621/02.10.002/2016- 30-Dec-16 White Label ATM Operators (WLAOs) - Para 6 17 Sourcing of cash from retail outlets 17 DCM (FNVD) G-7/16.01.05/17-18 15 Jan 2018 Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Para 5 Notes – Filing of FIR 22

