भारतीय �रज़वर् बैंक _____________ RESERVE BANK OF INDIA_____________ www.rbi.org.in RBI/DOR/2021-22/80 DOR.No.RET.REC.32/12.01.001/2021-22 July 20, 2021 (Updated as on December 16, 2024) (Updated as on September 25, 2023) (Updated as on April 06, 2022) Master Direction - Reserve Bank of India [Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)] Directions - 2021 In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 35 A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and pursuant to Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and Sections 18, 24 and 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 as amended from time to time, the Reserve Bank of India being satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the public interest so to do, hereby, issues the Directions hereinafter specified. CHAPTER – I PRELIMINARY 1. Short Title and Commencement These Directions shall be called the Reserve Bank of India Directions, - 2021 on Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR). (a) These Directions shall come into effect on the day these are placed on the official website of the Reserve Bank of India. (b) CHAPTER – II APPLICABILITY

2.a) The provisions of these Directions shall apply to all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) (including Regional Rural Banks), Small Finance Banks (SFBs), Payments Banks, Local Area Banks (LABs), Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks (UCBs), State Co-operative Banks (StCBs) and District Central Co-operative Banks (DCCBs) unless stated to the contrary. b) The maintenance of CRR shall be reported to Reserve Bank of India under the following statutory returns: 1 i) Form A Return for Scheduled Commercial Banks (including Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)), Small Finance Banks, Payments Banks and Local Area Banks ii) Form B Return for Scheduled Co-operative Banks iii) Form I Return for non-scheduled Co-operative Banks under Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, read with Section 56 thereof c) The maintenance of SLR shall be reported to Reserve Bank of India under the following statutory returns: i) Form VIII Return (for SLR) for Scheduled Commercial Banks (including Regional Rural Banks), Small Finance Banks, Payments Banks and Local Area Banks; ii) Form I Return (for SLR) for all Co-operative Banks under Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, read with Section 56 thereof

3. Definitions a) In these Directions, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms herein shall bear the meaning assigned to them below:- i) ‘Aggregate Deposits’ shall mean aggregation of demand and time deposits. ii) Apportionment of Saving Bank Account into demand liability and time liability: the bank shall undertake the apportionment of Saving Bank Account into demand liability and time liability as per the following procedure: a) The present practice of calculation of the proportion of demand liabilities and time liabilities by Scheduled Commercial Banks in respect of their savings bank deposits on the basis of the position as at the close of business on 30th September and 31st March every year (cf. RBI circular DBOD.No.BC.142/09.16.001/97-98 dated November 19, 1997) shall continue in the new system of interest application on savings bank deposits on a daily product basis; b) The average of the minimum balances maintained (in each account) in each of the months during the half year period shall be treated by the bank as the amount representing the "time liability" portion of the savings bank deposits. When such an amount is deducted from the 2 average of the actual balances maintained during the half year period, the difference would represent the "demand liability" portion. c) The proportions of demand and time liabilities so obtained for each half year shall be applied for arriving at demand and time liabilities components of savings bank deposits for all reporting fortnights during the next half year. iii) Approved Securities1/SLR securities:Following securities shall be considered as approved securities: (1) Dated securities of the Government of India issued from time to time under the market borrowing programme and the Market Stabilization Scheme; (2) Treasury Bills of the Government of India; and (3) State Development Loans (SDLs) of the State Governments issued from time to time under the market borrowing programme. (4) Any other instrument as may be notified by the Reserve Bank of India (As and when prescribed). Explanation:

(i) For Form A Return and its Annex, bank should report the total investment in approved securities as per it’s investment book i.e. including encumbered securities. (ii) For SLR purpose, only unencumbered portion of investment in approved securities would qualify as specified SLR assets. The following SLR securities, however, shall not be considered as encumbered securities for SLR purpose and hence they will also qualify as specified SLR asset: Securities lodged with another institution for an advance or any other credit arrangement to the extent to which such securities have not been (a) drawn against or availed of; Securities offered as collateral to the Reserve Bank for availing liquidity assistance from Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) up to the permissible (b) percentage of the total NDTL in India, carved out of the required SLR portfolio of the bank concerned; Securities offered as collateral to the Reserve Bank for availing liquidity assistance under Facility to Avail Liquidity for Liquidity Coverage Ratio (c) (FALLCR); and 1 Approved securities are commonly known as SLR securities 3 Securities acquired by banks under RBI-LAF and market repo transactions.

(d) iv) ‘Assets with Banking System’ shall: a) include balances with banks in current account, balances with banks and notified financial institutions in other accounts, funds made available to banking system by way of loans or deposits repayable at call or short notice of a fortnight or less and loans other than money at call and short notice made available to the banking system. b) any other amounts due from the banking system which cannot be classified under any of the above items are also to be taken as assets with the banking system. v) ‘Average daily balance’ means average of the balances held at the close of business on each day of a fortnight. vi) ‘Bank credit in India’ shall mean all outstanding loans and advances including advances for which provisions have been made and/or refinance has been received {but excludes rediscounted bills without recourse and advances written off at Head Office level (i.e. technical write off)}. vii) ‘Banking System’ or ’Banks’ wherever it appears in the prescribed Form A/Form B Return shall mean the banks and any other financial institutions referred to in sub-clause (i) to (vi) of the Explanation below Section 42(1)(d) and (e) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. viii) “cash” to be maintained by: i) Scheduled commercial banks, Small Finance Bank, Payments Bank and Local Area Banks shall include, • cash in hand, • the net balance in current accounts with other scheduled commercial banks in India. • the deposit required under sub-section (2) of Section 11 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated outside India; • any balance maintained by a scheduled bank with the Reserve Bank in excess of the balance required to be maintained by it under Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934 (2 of 1934); 4 • any balances held by a bank with the RBI under the Standing Deposit Facility (SDF). ii) Primary (urban) co-operative bank/State co-operative bank /District Central Co-operative bank shall include: • cash in hand maintained by a co-operative bank, which is a scheduled bank • Cash in hand maintained by a co-operative bank, not being a scheduled bank, in excess of the cash or balance required to be maintained under Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) read with Section 56 thereof; and • any balances maintained by a Co-operative bank, which is a scheduled bank, with the Reserve Bank in excess of the balance required to be maintained by it under Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); • any balances maintained by a Co-operative bank, not being a scheduled bank, with the Reserve Bank in excess of the balance required to be maintained by it under Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) read with Section 56 thereof; and • “Net balances in current accounts” as defined in the Explanation to sub- section (1) of Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) read with Section 56 thereof, in excess of the balance required to be maintained by it under the said section. • any balances held by a co-operative bank with the RBI under the Standing Deposit Facility (SDF). ix) ‘Cash in India/Cash in hand’ shall consist of total amount of rupee notes and coins held by bank branches / ATMs / Cash deposit machines maintained by banks in India, including transit cash on bank’s books as also cash with Business Correspondents (BCs), but shall exclude cash, where physical possession is with outsourced vendors/BCs, which is not replenished in bank’s ATM and/or is not reflected on bank’s books. x) “Corresponding new bank” shall mean a corresponding new bank constituted under Section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,1970 (5 of 1970); or under Section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980) xi) ‘Deemed Cash’ shall be cash held in India for the purpose of SLR maintenance and shall consist of the following: 5

(a) Cash in hand as defined in Section 3(a)(ix) of these Directions. (b) The deposit required under sub-section (2) of Section 11 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and kept with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated outside India (c) Any balance maintained by a scheduled bank with the Reserve Bank in excess of the balance required to be maintained by it under Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); (d) Net balance in current accounts with other SCBs in India.

(e) any balances held by a bank with the RBI under the Standing Deposit Facility (SDF). xii) Demand Deposit’ shall mean a deposit received by the bank which is withdrawable on demand and shall include current deposits, demand portion of savings deposits, credit balances in overdrafts, cash credit accounts, deposits payable at call, overdue deposits, cash certificates, etc. xiii) ‘Demand Liabilities’ shall mean liabilities of a bank which are payable on demand and shall include the following: a) current deposits, b) demand liabilities portion of savings bank deposits, c) margins held against letters of credit/guarantees, d) balances in overdue fixed deposits, cash certificates and cumulative/recurring deposits, e) outstanding Telegraphic Transfers (TTs), Mail Transfers (MTs), Demand Drafts (DDs), f) unclaimed deposits, g) credit balances in the Cash Credit account, h) deposits held as security for advances which are payable on demand. Explanation: Money at Call and Short Notice from outside the banking system shall be shown against liability to others. xiv) ‘District Central Co-operative Bank’ shall mean the Principal Co-operative Society in a district in a State, the primary object of which is financing of other Co-operative Societies in that district: Provided that in addition to such Principal Society in a district, or where there is no such Principal Society in a district, the State Government may declare any one or more Co-operative Societies carrying on the business of financing other Co-operative Societies in that district to be also or to be a District Central Co-operative Bank or District Central Co-operative Banks within the meaning of this definition. 6 xv) ‘Fortnight’ means the period from Saturday, following a reporting Friday, to the second following Friday, both days inclusive. xvi) ‘Investment in India’ shall consist of investment in approved government securities and other approved securities (as explained below). These shall include both encumbered and unencumbered securities as per bank’s investment book. (Except securities acquired by banks under RBI-LAF and market repo) xvii) ‘Investment in India in other Government Securities’ shall mean Investment in Government securities which are not approved securities {such as state development loans (SDLs) issued as UDAY bonds}. xviii) ‘Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF)’ shall mean fixed and variable rate Repo operations (for injection of liquidity) and reverse repo operations (for absorption of liquidity) conducted by the Reserve Bank of India from time to time. xix) ‘Local Area Bank’ shall mean a banking company licensed as such under Section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949). xx) ‘Marginal standing facility’ 2shall mean the facility under which the eligible banks can avail liquidity support from the Reserve Bank against excess SLR holdings. Additionally, they can also avail overnight liquidity by dipping into their stipulated SLR, up to a certain per cent of their respective NDTL outstanding at the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight. xxi) ‘Market borrowing programme’ shall mean the domestic rupee loans raised by the Government of India and the State Governments from the public and managed by the Reserve Bank through issue of marketable securities, governed by the provisions of the Government Securities Act, 2006, Public Debt Act, 1944 and the Regulations framed under those Acts, through an auction or any other method, as specified in the notification issued in this regard. xxii) ‘Net balance in current accounts’ shall have the same meaning assigned in explanation (c) to Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. xxiii) ‘Other Approved Securities’ shall mean Government Securities, other than the securities mentioned in Section 3(a)(iii) above, subject to the condition that they are notified as approved securities. 2 The rate of interest under MSF will be above the LAF repo rate, as decided by the RBI from time to time. 7 xxiv) ‘Other Demand and Time Liabilities (ODTL)’ shall include the following: a) Interest accrued on deposits, bills payable, unpaid dividends, suspense account balances representing amounts due to other banks or public, net credit balances in branch adjustment account, and any amounts due to the banking system which are not in the nature of deposits or borrowing.

(b) The balance outstanding in the blocked account pertaining to segregated outstanding credit entries for more than five years in inter-branch adjustment account, the margin money on bills purchased/discounted and gold3 borrowed by banks from abroad. (c) Borrowings through instruments qualifying for Upper Tier 2 and Tier 2 capital Explanation:

(i) Such liabilities may arise due to items like collection of bills on behalf of other banks, interest due to other banks and so on. If a bank cannot segregate the liabilities to the banking system from the total of ODTL, the entire ODTL may be shown against item II(c) 'Other Demand and Time Liabilities' of the Return in Form 'A' and Form ‘B’. (ii) Cash collaterals received under collateralised derivative transactions should be included in the bank’s NDTL for the purpose of reserve requirements as these are in the nature of ‘outside liabilities’. Interest accrued on deposits should be calculated on each reporting fortnight (as per the interest calculation methods applicable to various types of accounts) so that the bank’s liability in this regard is fairly reflected in the total NDTL of the same fortnightly return. xxv) ‘Primary Co-operative Bank’ shall mean a co-operative society, other than a primary agricultural credit society satisfying the following conditions:- a) the primary object or principal business of which is the transaction of banking business; b) the paid-up share capital and reserves of which are not less than one lakh of rupees; and c) the bye-laws of which do not permit admission of any other co-operative society as a member: 3 The conversion rate of gold into rupees is to be done by crossing the London AM fixing for Gold/USD rate with the rupee-dollar reference rate announced by Financial Benchmarks India Private Limited

(FBIL). 8 Provided that this sub clause shall not apply to the admission of a co- operative bank as a member by reason of such co-operative bank subscribing to the share capital of such co-operative society out of funds provided by the State Government for the purpose. xxvi) ‘Scheduled Commercial Bank’ shall mean a banking company included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and includes the State Bank of India, corresponding new bank and Regional Rural Bank. xxvii) ‘State Co-operative Bank’ shall mean the Principal Co-operative Society in a State, the primary object of which is the financing of other Co-operative Societies in the State: Provided that in addition to such Principal Society in a State, or where there is no such Principal Society in a State, the State Government may declare any one or more Co-operative Societies carrying on business in that State to be also or to be a State Co-operative Bank or State Co-operative Banks within the meaning of this definition; xxviii) ‘Time Deposits’ shall mean deposits other than demand deposits. xxix) ‘Time Liabilities’: Time Liabilities of a bank shall include those liabilities which are payable otherwise than on demand and shall include the following:

(a) fixed deposits, (b) cash certificates, (c) cumulative and recurring deposits, (d) time liabilities portion of savings bank deposits, (e) staff security deposits, (f) margin held against letters of credit, if not payable on demand, (g) deposits held as securities for advances which are not payable on demand (h) Gold deposits xxx) All other expressions unless defined herein shall have the same meaning as have been assigned to them under the Banking Regulation Act or the Reserve Bank of India Act, or any statutory modification or re-enactment thereto or as used in commercial parlance, as the case may be. 9 CHAPTER – IV CASH RESERVE RATIO (CRR)

4. Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) Every bank shall maintain in India by way of cash reserve, a sum equivalent to such percent of the total of its Net Demand and Time Liabilities (NDTL) in India, in such manner and for such dates, as the Reserve Bank in terms of Section 42(1) of the RBI Act, 1934 and Section 18(1) of BR Act, 1949 [including provisions of Section 18 (1) of the BR Act as applicable to cooperative banks], may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time having regard to the needs of securing the monetary stability in the country.

5. Incremental CRR In terms of Section 42(1A) of RBI Act, 1934, the Reserve Bank may require the scheduled banks to maintain, in addition to the balances prescribed under Section 42(1) of the Act, an additional average daily balance, the amount of which shall not be less than the rate specified by the Reserve Bank in the notification published in the Gazette of India from time to time. Provided that such additional balance shall be calculated with reference to the excess of the total of NDTL of the bank as shown in the Returns referred to in Section 42(2) of the RBI Act, 1934 over the total of its NDTL at the close of the business on the date specified in the notification. 6. Maintenance of CRR

(a) Every scheduled bank shall maintain in India with the Reserve Bank, an average daily balance, the amount of which shall not be less than 4.50 per cent till December 13, 2024, 4.25 per cent from the fortnight beginning December 14, 2024 and 4.00 per cent from fortnight beginning December 28, 2024 of the bank’s total NDTL in India as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight. The extent of provisions in this regard as applicable to scheduled banks shall, mutatis mutandis, be applicable to Small Finance Banks (SFBs) and Payments Banks (PBs).

(b) Every co-operative bank, (not being a scheduled co-operative bank), shall maintain in India on daily basis by way of cash reserve with itself; or by way of balance in current account with the Reserve Bank or the state co-operative bank of the State concerned; or by way of net balance in current accounts; or in case of a primary (Urban) co-operative bank, balances with District Central Co-operative bank of the district concerned; or in one or more the aforesaid ways, a sum equivalent to 4.50 per cent till December 13, 2024, 4.25 per cent from the fortnight beginning December 14, 2024 and 4.00 per cent from 10 fortnight beginning December 28, 2024 of its NDTL in India, as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight.

(c) Local Area Banks shall maintain in India by way of cash reserve with itself or by way of balance in a current account with Reserve Bank, or by way of net balance in current accounts or in one or more of the aforesaid ways, a sum equivalent to 4.50 percent till December 13, 2024, 4.25 per cent from the fortnight beginning December 14, 2024 and 4.00 per cent from fortnight beginning December 28, 2024 of the total of its NDTL in India as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight. 7 Maintenance of Minimum CRR on Daily Basis Every scheduled bank, small finance bank and payments bank shall maintain minimum CRR of not less than ninety per cent of the required CRR on all days during the reporting fortnight, in such a manner that the average of CRR maintained daily shall not be less than the CRR prescribed by the Reserve Bank. 8 Computation of Net Demand and Time Liabilities (NDTL)

(i) NDTL of a bank includes (a) liabilities towards the banking system net of assets with the banking system as defined in Section 42 of the RBI Act, 1934 for scheduled banks, Small Finance Banks and Payments Banks or Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 for non-scheduled banks or Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 read with Section 56 thereof for non- scheduled co-operative banks and (b) liabilities towards others in the form of demand and time deposits or borrowings or other miscellaneous items of liabilities. (ii) For the purpose of these Directions, the Reserve Bank may specify from time to time with reference to any transaction or class of transactions that such transaction or transactions shall be regarded as liability in India of a bank. (iii) If any question arises as to whether any transaction or transactions shall be regarded, for the purpose of these Directions, as liability in India of a bank, the bank shall approach the RBI. The decision of the Reserve Bank thereon shall be final. (iv) Loans/borrowings from abroad by banks in India shall be reckoned as 'liabilities to others' and shall be subject to reserve requirements. On the other hand, lending to banks abroad will not be considered as assets with the banking system and hence will not be allowed to be netted out from inter-bank liabilities. 11

(v) Upper Tier II instruments raised and maintained in India/abroad shall be reckoned as liability for the computation of NDTL for the purpose of reserve requirements. (vi) The balance amount in respect of the drafts issued by the accepting bank on its correspondent bank under the Remittance Facilities Scheme and remaining unpaid shall be reckoned as ‘Liability to others in India’ for the computation of NDTL. The amount received by correspondent banks shall be reckoned as ‘Liability to the Banking System’ and this liability may be netted off by the correspondent banks against the inter-bank assets. (vii) Sums placed by banks for issuing drafts/interest/dividend warrants shall be treated as 'Assets with banking system' and banks shall have the option to net them off from their inter-bank liabilities. (viii) The calculation of the proportion of demand liabilities and time liabilities by scheduled banks, Small Finance Banks and Payments Banks in respect of their savings bank deposits on the basis of the position as at the close of business on 30th September and 31st March every year shall continue with interest application on savings bank deposits on a daily product basis.

9. Liabilities not to be included for NDTL computation The liabilities mentioned below shall not form part of liabilities of a bank for the purpose of CRR and SLR: a)(i) Paid up capital, reserves, borrowings through instruments qualifying for Tier1 and additional Tier1 capital; any credit balance in the Profit & Loss Account of the bank; amount of any loan /refinance taken from RBI, Exim Bank, NHB, NABARD and SIDBI. Provided that the funds collected by various branches of the bank or other banks for the issue and held pending finalization of allotment of the additional Tier1 preference shares shall have to be taken into account for the purpose of calculation of reserve requirements. a)(ii) In the case of a State Co-operative Bank/District Central Co-operative Bank, any loan taken from the State Government or National Co-operative Development Corporation, any deposit of money representing reserve fund maintained by any co-operative society within the area of operation of the bank. In the case of a District Central Co-operative bank, also an advance taken by it from the concerned State Co-operative Bank. In respect of any advance granted by the State Co-operative Bank / District Central Co-operative Bank against balance maintained with it, such balance to the extent of amount outstanding in it. 12 Provided further that any advance or other credit arrangement drawn and availed against approved securities shall not be included for NDTL computation for SLR purposes (in case of Scheduled StCBs) and for both CRR and SLR purposes (in case of other StCBs / District Central Co-operative Banks). a)(iii) In the case of a Regional Rural Bank, any loan taken by such bank from its sponsor bank. a)(iv) Any advance taken by a Primary Cooperative Bank from State Government, National Co-operative Development Corporation, State Co- operative bank of the State concerned or District Central Co-operative Bank of the district concerned as also any advance or credit arrangement drawn or availed of against approved securities. In case of an advance granted against any balance maintained with it by a Primary Co-operative Bank, such balance to the extent of the amount outstanding in respect of such advance will be excluded from the NDTL computation for SLR (in case of Scheduled Primary Co-operative Bank) and for both CRR and SLR (in case of other Primary Co- operative Banks). a)(v) Any loan /refinance taken by a scheduled/non-scheduled commercial bank from NaBFID will be excluded from the NDTL computation for CRR/SLR. The loan /refinance taken by a Scheduled Co-operative Bank from NaBFID will be excluded from the NDTL computation for CRR only (not for SLR). Further, loan /refinance taken by a non-scheduled co-operative bank from NaBFID will not be excluded from the NDTL computation for CRR/SLR. b) Net income tax provision; c) Amount received from DICGC towards claims and held by the bank pending adjustments thereof; d) Amount received from ECGC by invoking the guarantee; e) Amount received from an insurance company on ad-hoc settlement of claims pending judgment of the Court; f) Amount received from the Court Receiver; g) The liabilities arising on account of utilization of limits under Bankers’ Acceptance Facility (BAF); h) District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) subsidy kept in Subsidy Reserve Fund account in the name of Self Help Groups; 13 i) Subsidy released by NABARD under Investment Subsidy Scheme for Construction/Renovation/Expansion of Rural Godowns; j) Subsidy released by Central/ State Government which is kept in zero per cent fixed deposit account, if the terms / conditions prescribed in this regard by the Government and the accounting / operating treatment given to zero per cent FDR account are same as that of zero per cent Subsidy Reserve Fund account; k) Net unrealized gain/loss arising from derivatives transaction under trading portfolio; l) Income flows received in advance such as annual fees and other charges which are not refundable; and m) Bill rediscounted by a bank with eligible financial institutions as approved by

RBI. n) Amount received by the eligible banks from National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Limited (NCGTC) by invoking the guarantee towards claims and pending adjustments thereof. 10. Exempted Categories Scheduled Banks are exempted from maintaining CRR on the following liabilities a) Net of liabilities to the banking system from the assets with the banking system defined in Section 42 (1) (d) and 42 (1) (e) of the RBI Act, 1934 as under :-

(A) Liabilities to the banking system as computed under clause (d) of explanation to section 42(1) of the RBI Act, 1934. The aggregate of the "liabilities" of a scheduled bank, which is not a State Co-operative Bank, to:- i) the State Bank of India ii) a corresponding new bank constituted by Section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, and a corresponding new bank constituted by Section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, 14 iii) any Regional Rural Bank established under Section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, iv) a banking company as defined in Clause (c) of Section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), v) a co-operative bank as defined in Clause (cci) of Section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, and vi) any other financial institution notified by the Central Government in this behalf, shall be reduced by the aggregate of the liabilities of all such banks and institutions to the scheduled bank.

(B) Liabilities to the banking system as computed under clause (e) of explanation to section 42(1) of the RBI Act, 1934. The aggregate of the "liabilities" of a scheduled bank, which is a State Co-operative Bank, to:- i) the State Bank of India ii) a corresponding new bank constituted by Section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, and a corresponding new bank constituted by Section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, iii) a banking company as defined in Clause (c) of Section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), iv) any other financial institution notified by the Central Government in this behalf, shall be reduced by the aggregate of the liabilities of all such banks and institutions to the State co-operative bank. b) Credit balances in ACU (US$) Accounts; c) Demand and Time Liabilities in respect of their Offshore Banking Units (OBUs). 15 d) Minimum of Eligible Credit (EC) and outstanding Long-term Bonds (LB) to finance infrastructure loans and affordable housing loans as per guidelines - DBOD.BP.BC.No.25/08.12.014/2014-15 dated July 15, 2014 and DBR.BP.BC.No.50/08.12.014/2014-15 dated November 27, 2014 for Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding RRBs); e) Liabilities in respect of the bank’s International Financial Services Centre(IFSC) Banking Units (IBUs); f) Funds Borrowed under market repo against Government securities. g) Incentivising Bank Credit to Specific Sectors – Exemption from CRR Maintenance

(i) Scheduled Commercial Banks have been allowed to deduct the equivalent amount of incremental credit disbursed by them as retail loans to automobiles, residential housing, and loans to micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), over and above the outstanding level of credit to these segments as at the end of the fortnight ended January 31, 2020 from their NDTL for maintenance of CRR. (ii) An amount equivalent to the incremental credit outstanding from the fortnight beginning January 31, 2020 and up to the fortnight ending July 31, 2020 will be eligible for deduction from NDTL for the purpose of computing the CRR for a period of five years from the date of origination of the loan or the tenure of the loan, whichever is earlier. (iii) Banks are required to report the exemption availed at the end of a fortnight under “exemptions/others” in the Section-42 return, prescribed in Annex A to Form A. Proper fortnightly records of net incremental credit extended to the select sectors/NDTL exemption claimed, duly certified by the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) or an equivalent level officer, must be maintained by banks for supervisory review. h) All banks are advised that with effect from the reporting fortnight beginning July 30, 2022, incremental FCNR (B) deposits as also NRE Term deposits with reference to base date of July 1, 2022, mobilised by banks are exempt from maintenance of CRR and SLR. The exemptions are valid for deposits raised till November 04, 2022. The exemption on reserves maintenance will be available for the original deposit amounts till such time the deposits are held in the bank’s books. 11a) CRR Computation In order to improve cash management by banks, as a measure of simplification, a lag of one fortnight is allowed to banks to maintain CRR based on the NDTL of the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight. 16 b) No Interest Payment on Eligible Cash Balances maintained by SCBs with RBI under CRR Reserve Bank of India does not pay any interest on the CRR balances maintained by SCBs.

12. Loans out of FCNR (B) Deposits and Inter-Bank Foreign Currency (IBFC) Deposits Loans out of Foreign Currency Non–Resident Accounts (Banks), (FCNR [B] Deposits Scheme) and Inter-Bank Foreign Currency (IBFC) deposits shall be included as part of bank credit for the purpose of these Directions. Banks shall use the conversion rate announced by Financial Benchmarks India Private Limited (FBIL) for the purpose of converting foreign assets/liabilities for reporting in the statutory returns mentioned at para 2. For conversion of assets/liabilities in other currencies, banks may use New York Closing Rate pertaining to the day end of the reporting Friday for converting such currencies into USD and then use the reference rate of FBIL for USD/ INR for the same day for conversion into INR. CHAPTER – V STATUTORY LIQUIDITY RATIO (SLR)

13. Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) Every bank, in addition to the cash reserves which it is required to maintain under these Directions, shall maintain in India, assets, the value of which shall not be less than such percentage not exceeding forty per cent of the total of its demand and time liabilities in India as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight as the Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time and such assets shall be maintained in such form and such manner, as may be specified in such notification. 14. SLR - Eligible Assets Every scheduled commercial banks (including Regional Rural Banks), Local area banks, Small Finance Banks, Payments Bank, Primary co-operative bank, state co-operative bank and district central co-operative bank shall maintain in India assets (hereinafter referred to as ‘SLR assets’) the value of which shall not, at the close of business on any day, be less than 18 per cent of their total net demand and time liabilities in India as on the last Friday of the 17 second preceding fortnight in accordance with the method of valuation specified by RBI from time to time.

15. Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) Banks permitted by Reserve Bank shall have the option to participate in the Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) Scheme introduced by the Reserve Bank. The features of the scheme are given in ensuing paragraphs: (i) The eligible banks shall have the option to borrow up to two per cent of their respective NDTL outstanding at the end of the second preceding fortnight. (ii) The eligible entities shall also continue to access overnight funds under this facility against their excess SLR holdings. (iii) In the event of banks’ SLR holding falling below the statutory requirement up to two per cent of their NDTL, banks shall not have the obligation to seek a specific waiver for default in SLR compliance arising out of use of this facility in terms of notification issued under sub section (2A) of Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.

16. Within the mandatory SLR requirement, Government securities to the extent allowed by the Reserve Bank under Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) are permitted to be reckoned as the Level 1 High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLAs) for the purpose of computing Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) of banks. In addition to this, banks are permitted to reckon up to such percentage, as may be stipulated by RBI from time to time, of their NDTL within the mandatory SLR requirement as level 1 HQLA. This facility has been provided to enable banks to avail liquidity for Liquidity Coverage Ratio. 17. SLR assets shall be maintained by banks as under: A. For Scheduled Commercial Banks (Including Regional Rural Banks), Local Area Banks, Small Finance Banks and Payments Banks. Cash, or; Gold, as defined in Section 5(g) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (a) (10 of 1949), valued at a price not exceeding the current market price, (b) or; Unencumbered investment in any of the following instruments [hereinafter referred to as Statutory Liquidity Ratio securities ("SLR (c) securities")], namely:- 18

(i) Dated securities of the Government of India issued from time to time under the Market Borrowing Programme and the Market Stabilization Scheme; or (ii) Treasury Bills of the Government of India; or (iii) State Development Loans (SDLs) of the State Governments issued from time to time under the market borrowing programme: (iv) Any other instrument as may be notified by the Reserve Bank of India (As and when prescribed). the deposit and unencumbered approved securities required, under sub-section (2) of Section 11 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949(10 of (d) 1949), to be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated outside India; any balance maintained by a scheduled bank with the Reserve Bank in excess of the balance required to be maintained by it under Section 42

(e) of the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934 (2 of 1934); Provided that the instruments referred to in items (c) (i) to (iii) mentioned above that have been acquired from Reserve Bank of India under reverse repo, shall be considered as eligible assets for SLR maintenance. Provided further that the following SLR-securities shall not be treated as encumbered for the purpose of maintenance of SLR assets, namely:- securities lodged with another institution for an advance or any other credit arrangement to the extent to which such securities have not been (a) drawn against or availed of; securities offered as collateral to the Reserve Bank for availing liquidity assistance under Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) up to the permissible (b) percentage of the total NDTL in India, carved out of the required SLR portfolio of the bank concerned; securities offered as collateral to the Reserve Bank for availing liquidity assistance under Facility to Avail Liquidity for Liquidity Coverage Ratio (c) (FALLCR); and B. For primary (Urban) co-operative banks/ state cooperative banks/ district central cooperative banks, (a) Cash, or 19

(b) Gold as defined in Section 5(g) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS) (10 of 1949) valued at a price not exceeding the current market price: or (c) Unencumbered investment in approved securities as defined in section 5(a) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) read with section 56 thereof: Provided that the instruments that have been acquired from Reserve Bank of India under reverse repo, shall be considered as eligible assets for SLR maintenance. Provided further that the following securities shall not be treated as encumbered for the purpose of maintenance of SLR assets, namely:- (a) securities lodged with another institution for an advance or any other credit arrangement to the extent to which such securities have not been drawn against or availed of; securities offered as collateral to the Reserve Bank for availing liquidity assistance under MSF up to the permissible percentage of the total (b) NDTL in India, carved out of the required SLR portfolio of the bank concerned. Explanation- For the purpose of these Directions,

(a) i) Securities lodged in the Gilt Account of the bank maintained with Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) under Constituent Subsidiary General Ledger account (CSGL) facilities remaining unencumbered at the end of any day can be reckoned for SLR purposes by the bank concerned. ii) Funds borrowed under repo including tri-party repo in government securities shall be exempted from CRR/SLR computation and the security acquired under repo shall be eligible for SLR provided the security is primarily eligible for SLR as per the provisions of the Act under which it is required to be maintained. iii) Borrowings by a bank through repo in corporate bonds and debentures shall be reckoned as liabilities for Cash Reserve Ratio/ Statutory Liquidity Ratio requirement and, to the extent these liabilities are to the banking system, they shall be netted as per Section 42 (1) (d) of the RBI Act, 1934.

(b) All banks shall maintain investments in Government Securities only in Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) Accounts with Reserve Bank or in CSGL 20 Accounts of scheduled commercial banks, Primary Dealers (PDs), State Co- operative Banks, and Stock Holding Corporation of India Ltd.(SHCIL) or in the dematerialised accounts with depositories such as National Securities Depositories Ltd (NSDL), Central Depository Services Ltd. (CDSL), and National Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. (NSCCL). (c) Banks shall report the SDF balances held by banks with RBI under "Cash in hand" in Form VIII or Form I, as applicable, as it is an eligible asset for SLR maintenance. The balances held by banks with RBI under the SDF shall not be eligible for Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) maintenance. Further, scheduled banks are not required to report SDF balances held by banks with RBI, in Form A/B return. Note:

1. With a view to disseminating information on the SLR status of a Government security, it has been decided that: i) the SLR status of securities issued by the Government of India and the State Governments will be indicated in the Press Release issued by the Reserve Bank of India at the time of issuance of the securities; and, ii) an updated and current list of the SLR securities will be posted on the Reserve Bank's website (www.rbi.org.in) under the link "Database on Indian Economy” under the head ‘Statistics’. 2. The cash management bill shall be treated as Government of India Treasury Bill and thus be reckoned as SLR security. CHAPTER – VI PROCEDURE FOR COMPUTATION OF SLR

18. Procedure for Computation of NDTL for SLR i) Total NDTL for the purpose of SLR under Section 24 (2A) of Banking Regulation Act, 1949, shall be computed on the similar procedure as followed for CRR. ii) The liabilities mentioned under Section 9 of these Directions shall not form part of liabilities for the purpose of SLR also. iii) SCBs are required to include inter-bank term deposits/ term borrowing liabilities of all maturities in 'Liabilities to the Banking System'. iv) Banks shall include their inter-bank assets of term deposits and term lending of all maturities in 'Assets with the Banking System' for computation of NDTL for SLR purpose. 21 v) Additionally, liabilities mentioned at Para 10 (d), 10 (e), 10 (f) and 10(h) are exempt from SLR requirement. 19. Classification and Valuation of SLR eligible securities Classification and valuation of approved securities shall be in accordance with the extant instructions on Prudential Norms for Classification, Valuation and Operation of Investment Portfolio by banks, as applicable. CHAPTER – VII REPORTING FORTNIGHTLY CRR RETURN IN FORM A / FORM B/ FORM I

20. Under Section 42(2) of the RBI Act, 1934, every scheduled commercial bank (including Regional Rural Banks), scheduled state co-operative bank, Small Finance Bank, Payments Bank and Local Area Bank shall submit to Reserve Bank a provisional Return in Form 'A' / Form ‘B’ as the case may be, at the close of business on each alternate Friday and within seven days after the date of the relevant fortnight to which it relates. 21. Under Section 42(2) of the RBI Act, 1934, every Scheduled Primary Co- operative banks shall submit the above-mentioned Return in Form ‘B’ at the close of business on each alternate Friday within seven days after the date to which it relates. 22. Where such reporting Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, for one or more offices of the bank, the Return shall give at the close of business of the preceding working day’s figure in respect of such office or offices, but shall nevertheless be deemed to relate to that Friday. 23. The final Return in Form 'A' or Form ‘B’ (for scheduled state co-operative banks), as the case may be, shall be submitted to Reserve Bank within 20 days from expiry of the relevant fortnight along with

(i) the Memorandum to the Return in Form 'A' / Form ‘B’ giving details of paid-up capital, reserves, time deposits comprising short-term (of contractual maturity of one year or less) and long-term (of contractual maturity of more than one year), certificates of deposits, NDTL, total CRR requirement, etc., (ii) Annex A / Annex - I to the Return in Form ‘A’ / Form ‘B’ showing all foreign currency liabilities and assets and 22 (iii) Annex B / Annex – II to return in Form ‘A’ / Form ‘B’ giving details about investment in approved securities, investment in unapproved securities, memo items such as subscription to shares/debentures/ bonds in primary market and subscriptions through private placement. 23A. The commercial banks should adhere to the following practice for presentation of Reverse Repo transactions in the Form ‘A’ return I. Reverse Repo transactions with the banks should be reported as under: i. For original tenors up to and inclusive of 14 days a) Item III(b) of Form A (i.e., Money at call and short notice); and b) Memo item 2.1 of Annex A to Form A (i.e., under Inter Bank Assets) ii. For original tenors more than 14 days a) Item III(c) of Form A (i.e., Advances to banks); and b) Memo item 2.1 and 2.2 of Annex A to Form A (i.e., under Inter Bank Assets) II. The Reverse Repo transactions of a bank with non-banks (other institutions) should be reported as under: i. For original tenors up to and inclusive of 14 days - Not required to be reported in Form A. ii. For original tenors more than 14 days - Item VI(a) of Form A [i.e. Loans, cash credits and overdrafts under Bank Credit in India (excluding inter-bank advances)]

24. Where the last Friday of a month is not a reporting Friday for the purpose of the above Returns, the bank shall send to the Reserve Bank, a special Return in Form A or Form B as the case may be, giving the same details as specified above as at the close of business on such last Friday or where such last Friday is a public holiday under Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, as at the close of business on the preceding working day and such Return shall also be submitted within seven days after the date to which it relates. 23

25. Every co-operative bank, not being a scheduled co-operative bank, shall submit a Return in Form I together with Appendix I, to the regional office concerned of the Reserve Bank, not later than 20 days after the end of the month to which it relates showing the position, inter alia, of cash reserves maintained by the bank under Section 18 of the B.R. Act, 1949 read with Section 56, ibid, as at the close of business on each alternate Friday during the month. Where such alternate Friday is a public holiday under Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 for one or more offices of the bank, the Return shall give the preceding day’s figure in respect of such office or offices, but shall nevertheless be deemed to relate to that Friday. 26. Non Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks shall furnish in Appendix I, as per proforma given in Annex 5, along with the Return in Form I showing the position of the (a) Cash Reserve to be maintained under Section 18 of the BR Act, 1949 (AACS) (b) Cash Reserve actually maintained, and (c) Extent of deficit / surplus, if any, for each day of the month.

27. Whenever there are wide variations between the sources and uses of funds as being reported in the fortnightly Return and the variations exceed 20 per cent, the banks concerned should give reasons therefor in the Return. 28. In terms of Regulation 5(i) (c) of the Scheduled Banks Regulations,1951 and Regulation 4(1) of the Banking Regulation (Co-operative Societies) Rules, 1966, the banks are required to furnish a list of the names, the officials designations and specimen signatures of the officers of the banks who are authorized to sign on behalf of the banks, Returns prescribed under Section 42(2) of the RBI Act, 1934, and Section 18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. The bank has to submit to Reserve Bank fresh set of signatures whenever there is change in the incumbency.

29. Form A and Form VIII are not to be submitted in hard copy/paper returns by Scheduled Commercial banks. The Scheduled Commercial banks have to submit these returns in electronic form on Centralised Information Management System (CIMS) live site using digital signatures of two authorised officials. While submitting these returns, banks have to ensure that the same is compliant with the prevalent IT laws of the country. 24 RETURN IN FORM VIII/Form I (SLR) 30. Form VIII Every scheduled commercial bank (including Regional Rural Bank), Small Finance Bank, Payments Bank and Local Area Bank shall submit to the Reserve Bank before 20th day of every month, a Return in Form VIII showing the amount of SLR held on alternate Fridays during the immediate preceding month with particulars of their DTL in India held on such Fridays or if any such Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the preceding working day.

31. Annex to Form VIII Every scheduled bank shall also submit a statement as Annex to Form VIII Return giving daily position of (a) assets held for the purpose of compliance with SLR, (b) excess cash balances maintained by them with RBI in the prescribed format, and (c) mode of valuation of securities. 32. Form I (i) All Co-operative Banks (scheduled and non-scheduled), are required to submit a Return in Form I (as detailed in Annex 4) under Section 24 of the BR Act, 1949 (AACS) every month showing the position of liquid assets maintained under the said Section as at the close of business on each alternate Friday during the month not later than twenty days after the end of the month to which it relates. [Note: In respect of Non-Scheduled UCBs, Return in Form I is common for reporting cash reserves and statutory liquid assets.] (ii) All Primary Co-operative Banks (scheduled and non-scheduled) are required to furnish Appendix II, as per proforma given in Annex 7, together with the Return in Form I showing the position of - (a) statutory liquid assets required to be maintained under Section 24 of the BR Act,1949 (AACS). (b) liquid assets actually maintained, and

(c) the extent of deficit/surplus for each day of the month. (iii) All Primary Co-operative Banks (scheduled and non-scheduled) should furnish the information w.r.t. valuation of securities for SLR, format for which is given in Annex 6. Information in the format may be furnished as an Annex, to 25 return in Form I, only to the Regional Office concerned of Department of Supervision. The monthly Return should contain information of the fortnights following in the respective months. 33. Correctness of computation of NDTL to be certified by Statutory Auditors The Statutory Auditors shall verify and certify that all items of outside liabilities, as per the bank’s books had been duly compiled by the bank and correctly reflected under NDTL in the fortnightly/monthly statutory returns submitted to Reserve Bank for the financial year. 34. Register for daily position of liquidity

(i) All co-operative banks shall maintain a register, as per format given in Annex VIII, showing the daily position of cash reserve and liquid assets maintained under Sections 18 and 24 of the Banking regulation Act, 1949 read with Section 56 thereof which shall be put up daily to Chief Executive Officer, who is responsible for ensuring compliance with the statutory liquidity requirements at the close of business every day. CHAPTER – VIII PENALTIES Penalties for default in CRR Maintenance 35. Every bank is liable to pay to the Reserve Bank, penal interest as mentioned below, if the daily balance of cash reserve (CRR) held by the bank during any fortnight is below the minimum prescribed by or under these Directions.

(i) Penal interest shall be recovered from scheduled Commercial banks (including Regional Rural Banks), Small Finance Banks, Payments Banks, all Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks and all Scheduled State Co-operative Banks in the event of shortfall in maintenance of prescribed CRR on a daily basis for that day at the rate of three per cent per annum above the Bank Rate on the amount by which the amount actually maintained falls short of the prescribed minimum on that day and if the shortfall continues on the next succeeding day/s, penal interest shall be recovered at the rate of five per cent per annum above the Bank Rate. 26 (ii) In cases of shortfall in maintenance of CRR on average basis during a fortnight, penal interest will be recovered as envisaged in sub-section (3) of Section 42 of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. (iii) In the case of a co-operative bank, not being a scheduled co-operative bank, the bank shall be liable to pay to the Reserve Bank, penal interest as envisaged in sub-section (1-A) of Section 18 read with Section 56 of the B.R. Act, 1949, if the daily balance of CRR maintained by the bank falls below the prescribed minimum CRR. (iv) In case of Local Area Banks, the banks shall be liable to pay to the Reserve Bank, penal interest as envisaged in sub-section (1A) Section 18 of B.R. Act, 1949, if the daily balance of CRR maintained by the banks fall below the prescribed minimum CRR.

36. Banks are required to furnish the particulars such as date, amount, percentage, reason for default in maintenance of requisite CRR and also action taken to avoid recurrence of such default. 37. Under the provisions of Section 42(3A) of the RBI Act, 1934, penal interest at the increased rate of five per cent above the Bank Rate become payable and if the default still continues during the next succeeding fortnight,

(i) Every Director, Manager or Secretary of the scheduled bank/ Small Finance Bank/ Payment Bank who is knowingly and willfully a party to the default, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred Rupees and with a further fine which may extend to five hundred Rupees for each subsequent fortnight during which default continues. (ii) The Reserve Bank may prohibit a scheduled bank/ Small Finance Bank/ Payments Bank from receiving any fresh deposit after the said fortnight, and if default is made by the bank in complying with the prohibition referred to in this clause, every director and officer of the bank who is knowingly and willfully a party to such default or who through negligence or otherwise contributes to such default shall in respect of each such default be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for each day after the first, on which a deposit received in contravention of such prohibition is retained by the scheduled bank. 27

38. Failure to submit the Return/late submission of the Return shall attract the provisions of Section 42(4) of RBI Act, 1934 and banks are liable for imposition of penalties as indicated therein. In case of non-scheduled co-operative banks, failure to submit the prescribed statutory returns in time under Section 18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 read with Section 56 thereof, attracts the provisions of Section 46(4) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS), and the banks are liable to imposition of penalties as indicated therein.

39. Penalties for default in SLR Maintenance a) On the failure of the bank to maintain as on any day, the amount of SLR required to be maintained by a bank, the bank shall be liable to pay to the Reserve Bank in respect of that default, the penal interest as envisaged under Section 24 read with Section 56 of the BR Act, 1949. b) Failure to submit the prescribed return in time will attract the provisions of Section 46(4) of the Act ibid. c) Where it is observed that banks are persistently defaulting despite instructions and repeated advice, the Reserve Bank in addition to levy of penalty on such defaulting banks, may be constrained to consider cancelling the licence in case of licensed banks and refuse licence in case of unlicensed banks under Section 22 of the Act, ibid. The banks should, therefore, in their own interest ensure maintenance of statutory liquidity ratio at prescribed rates and be very prompt in submission of required Return to Regional Office concerned of Reserve Bank. Disclaimer: It is hereby advised that mere inclusion of any item in the above Master Direction should not be construed as a permission to undertake all such activities by a banking entity. 28

CHAPTER – IX REPEAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS 40. With the issue of these directions, the instructions/ guidelines contained in the following circulars (to the extent of applicability to the banks) issued by the Reserve Bank stand repealed. Sr Circular No/ Mail Box Date Subject No Clarification 1 DBOD.No.Ret.BC 149/C December Other Demand & Time Liabilities (ODTL) 236(G)-71 27, 1971 2 CPC.BC.69/279 (A)-84 October 30, Data on maintenance of SLR -Supplemental 1984 information to the Special Return 3 DBOD.No.Leg.BC.34/C.23 March 23, Demand Liabilities, Time Liabilities, ODTL 3A-85 1985 4 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.40/C.23 March 27, Amount received from DICGC 6(G)Spl-86 1986 5 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.98/C.96 September Exclusion from NDTL - Receipt from ECGC, (Ret)-86 12, 1986 Insurance Company and Court Receiver 6 DBOD.No.BC.58/12.02.00 May 13, Margin money on bills discounted/purchased 1/94-95 1995 7 DBOD.No.BC.111/12.02.0 October 13, Borrowings from banks abroad-Maintenance 01/97 1997 of reserve requirement 8 DBOD.BC.89/12.01.001/9 August 24, Return in Form 'A' 8-99 1998 9 DBOD.No.IBS.BC.18/23.6 March 04, Import of Gold/Silver

7.001/97-98 1998 10 DBOD.No.IBS.BC.1929/23 March 14, Import of Gold .67.001/97-98 1998 11 DBOD.No.IBS.BC.72/23.6 July 21, Maintenance of CRR and SLR on Liabilities 7.001/99-2000 1999 under Gold Borrowed from Abroad and Lent to Jewellery Exporters in India for the purpose of Exports 12 DBOD.No.IBS.BC.73/23.6 July 21, Notification 7.001/99-2000 1999 13 DBOD.No.IBS.BC.67/23.6 January 11, Gold Loans - Notional Rate for 7.001/2000-01 2001 Conversion for Reserve Requirement Purpose 14 DBOD.No.BC.50/12.01.00 November Collection of Data from Scheduled 1/2000-01 07, 2000 Commercial Banks in Annex A and B 15 DBOD.No.BC.82/12.01.00 March 26, Maintenance of CRR-ACU Dollar Funds- 1/2001-2002 2002 Exemption of 16 DBOD.No.BC.87/12.02.00 April 10, Valuation of Securities for the purpose of 1/2001-2002 2002 SLR 29 17 DBOD.IBS.BC.88/23.13.0 March 27, Offshore Banking Units (OBUs) in Special 04/2002-03 2003 Economic Zones (SEZs) 18 RPCD.PLFS.BC.No.2/05.0 July 03, Capital Investment Subsidy Scheme for 2.02 (RG)/2003-04 2003 Construction/Renovation/Expansion of Rural Godowns 19 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.14/12.0 August 21, Arrangements with correspondent banks for

1.001/2003-04 2003 remittance facilities 20 DBOD.BP.BC.57/21.01.00 January 25, Enhancement of Banks’ Capital Raising 2/2005-2006 2006 Options for Capital Adequacy Purposes 21 RPCD.SP.BC.No.06/09.01 July 07, Swarna Jayanti Swarozgar Yojana .01/2006-07 2006 22 RBI/2006-2007/106 August 08, Section 42 (1) of the RBI Act, 1934 2006 23 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.82/12.0 April 20, Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 1.001/2006-07 2007 24 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.36/12.0 September Maintenance of SLR 2.001/2009-10 01, 2009 25 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.57/12.0 November Maintenance of CRR on exempted categories 1.001/2009-10 05, 2009 26 Mail Box Clarification November Apportionment of Savings Bank Deposits into 30, 2010 Demand and Time Portions 27 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.91/12.0 May 09, Maintenance of SLR 2.001/2010-11 2011 28 DBOD.NO.Ret.BC.113/12. June 29, Section 42 of the RBI Act, 1934-Maintenance 01.001/2011-12 2012 of CRR on Foreign Currency (Non-Resident) [FCNR (B)] Scheme 29 Mail Box Clarification August 17, Maintenance of CRR on FCNR (B) Scheme 2012 30 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.76/12.0 January 29, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act,

1.001/2012-13 2013 1934-Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio 31 Mail Box Clarification April 25, Inclusion of Accrued Interest in the NDTL for 2013 maintenance of CRR/SLR 32 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.33/12.0 July 17, Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 2.001/2013-14 2013 1949 - Maintenance of SLR-Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) 33 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.55/12.0 September Section 42(1) of the RBI Act, 1934 -Change 1.001/2013-14 20, 2013 in Daily Minimum Cash Reserve Maintenance Requirement 34 DBOD.No.Ret.BC.93/12.0 January 31, Section 42(1) of RBI Act, 1934 and Section

1.001/2013-14 2014 24 of the BR Act, 1949 – FCNR(B)/NRE Deposits – Exemption from maintenance of CRR/SLR and exclusion from ANBC for Priority Sector Lending 30 35 DBOD.BP.BC.No.25/08.12 July 15, Issue of Long Term Bonds by Banks – .014/2014-15 2014 Financing of Infrastructure and Affordable Housing 36 DBR.BP.BC.No.52/21.04. November Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards – 098/2014-15 28, 2014 Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools and LCR Disclosure Standards 37 DBR.Ret.BC.70/12.02.001 February Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, /2014-15 03, 2015 1949 - Maintenance of SLR 38 DBR.No.Ret.BC.64/12.01. December Section 24 and Section 56 of the Banking 001/2015-16 10, 2015 Regulation Act, 1949 - Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR). 39 DBR.No.Ret.BC.91/12.01. April 05, Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India 001/2015-16 2016 Act, 1934 - Change in Daily Minimum Cash Reserve Maintenance Requirement 40 DBR.No.Ret.BC.10/12.02. December Section 24 and Section 56 of the Banking 001/2018-19 05, 2018 Regulation Act, 1949 - Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) 41 DOR.No.Ret.BC.30/12.01. February Incentivising Bank Credit to Specific Sectors 001/2019-20 10, 2020 – Exemption from CRR Maintenance 42 DOR.No.Ret.BC.38/12.01. February Investment in Certificates of Deposit (CDs) - 001/2019-20 26, 2020 Reporting in Form ‘A’ Return 43 DOR.No.Ret.BC.49/12.01. March 27, Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 001/2019-20 2020 44 DOR.No.Ret.BC.51/12.01. March 27, Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India 001/2019-20 2020 Act, 1934 - Change in Daily Minimum Cash Reserve Maintenance Requirement 45 DOR.No.Ret.BC.52/12.01. March 27, Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 001/2019-20 2020 1949 – Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) – Marginal Standing Facility

(MSF) 46 DOR.No.Ret.BC.78/12.01. June 26, Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India 001/2019-20 2020 Act, 1934 - Change in Minimum Daily Maintenance of the Cash Reserve Requirement 47 DOR.No.Ret.BC.77/12.02. June 26, Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 001/2019-20 2020 1949 – Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) – Marginal Standing Facility

(MSF) 48 DOR.No.Ret.BC.37/12.01. February Credit to MSME Entrepreneurs 001/2020-21 05, 2021 31 49 DOR.No.Ret.BC.36/12.01. February Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 001/2020-21 05, 2021 1949 – Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) – Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) - Extension of Relaxation 50 DOR.No.Ret.BC.35/12.01. February Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 001/2020-21 05, 2021 51 DoR.RET.REC.09/12.01.0 May 05, Credit to MSME Entrepreneurs 01/2021-22 2021 52 DOR.RET.REC.36/12.01.0 August 09, Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 01/2021-22 2021 1949 – Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) – Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) - Extension of Relaxation 53 DOR.RET.REC.73/12.01.0 December Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 01/2021-22 10, 2021 1949 – Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) – Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) - return to the normal dispensation 54 DOR.RET.REC.15/12.01.001 April 08, Section 24 and Section 56 of the Banking /2022-23 2022 Regulation Act, 1949 - Maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio

(SLR) 55 DOR.RET.REC.33/12.01.001 May 04, Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) /2022-23 2022 56 DOR.RET.REC.54/12.01.001 July 06, Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, /2022-23 2022 1934 and Section 18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 - FCNR (B)/NRE Term deposits - Exemption from maintenance of

CRR/SLR 57 DOR.RET.REC.79/12.01.0 October 13, Claims Received from the National Credit 01/2022-23 2022 Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd (NCGTC) - Classification for the Purpose of Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)/Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) 58 DoR.RET.REC.43/12.01.0 October 16, Reverse Repo transactions - Reporting in 01/2023-24 2023 Form ‘A’ Return 59 DoR.RET.REC.59/12.01.0 December Reverse Repo transactions - Reporting in 01/2023-24 22, 2023 Form ‘A’ Return 60 DoR.RET.REC.52/12.01.0 December Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 01/2024-25 06, 2024 32 (UBD/DCBR circulars) Sr Circular No Date Subject No 1 ACD.BR.474/A.12(24)/ September Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 67-8 27, 1967 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) - Maintenance of Liquid Assets 2 ACD.BR.464/A.12(24)/ November Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 68-9 12, 1968 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) - Maintenance of Percentage of Assets 3 ACD.BR.1196/B-1- April 12, The Banking Regulation (Co-operative Societies) 68/9 1969 Rules, 1966 4 ACD.BR.1005/B.1/70- April 02, The Banking Regulation (Co-operative Societies) 71 1971 Rules, 1966 5 ACD.BRL.612/C/71-2 January 24, Register showing the Daily Position of Cash 1972 Reserves and Liquid Assets Maintained under Sections 18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) - Primary Co-operative Bank 6 ACD.BR.277/B.1-74-5 September The Banking Regulation (Co-operative Societies) 30, 1974 Rules, 1966 - Amendment to Rules 5 and 9 and Change in the Forms I and VII of the Returns Prescribed thereunder 7 UBD.BR.498/A.12(24) January 08, Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to -84/85 1985 Co-operative Societies) - Section 24 - Investment in Government and Other Trustee Securities by Primary Co-operative Banks 8 UBD.BR.871/A.12(24)- May 10, 1985 Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to 84/85 Co-operative Societies) - Section 24 - Investment made under National Deposit Scheme 9 UBD.No.BR.1455/A12( May 31, 1986 Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to 24)-85/86 Co-operative Societies) - Section 24 - Investment in Units Issued by the Unit Trust of India 10 UBD.No.BR.35/A12(24 October 18, Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to )-86/87 1986 Co-operative Societies) - Sections 18 & 24 - Computation of Demand and Time Liabilities

6.00/97-98 1988 Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) under section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS) 12 UBD.No.BR.229/A-9- September Inclusion of Select Primary Urban Co-operative 88/89 09, 1988 Banks in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934 13 UBD.RBL.315/I-88/89 October 10, Submission of Fortnightly Returns by Scheduled 1988 Primary Co-operative Banks under Section 42(2) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 33 14 UBD.No.RBL.835/I.88/ March 27, Grant of Scheduled Status to Urban Co-operative 89 1989 Banks - Computation of Cash Reserve and Liquid Assets as well as Submission of various Statutory Returns 15 UBD.BR.50/A.12(24)- January 18, Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 - 89/90 1990 Eligible Securities for the Purpose of Statutory Liquidity Ratio - Kisan Vikas Patras and Fixed Deposits with Sardar Saroval Narmada Nigam Ltd. 16 UBD.BR.19/A.6-89/90 March 10, Netting Concept for Reserve Requirements - 1990 Dealings with Discount and Finance House of India Ltd. (DFHI) 17 UBD.No.BR.103/A-9- August 22, Notification 90/91 1990 18 UBD.No.BR.194/A.9- August 28, Maintenance of Minimum Average Balance under 90/91 1990 Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 19 UBD.No.BR.107/A.9- December Notification 90/91 24, 1990 20 UBD.BR.400/A.9-90- December Maintenance of Minimum Average Balance under 91 24, 1990 Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 21 UBD.BR.581/A.9-90/91 March 04, The Reserve Bank of India Scheduled Banks' 1991 Regulations, 1951 - Classification of Deposits Accepted under the Home Loan Accounts Scheme of the National Housing Bank in Form 'B' 22 UBD.No.BR.762/A- May 29, 1991 Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 9/90-91 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 23 UBD.BR.349/A.9-91/92 November Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 08, 1991 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 24 UBD.No.BR.773/A.9- May 05, 1992 Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 91/92 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 25 UBD.No.RBL.125/i/91- June 03, Scheduled Primary Co-operative Banks - 92 1992 Clarifications on Returns under Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 26 UBD.No.BR.86/A.9/92/ October 09, Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 93 1992 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 27 UBD.No.BR.72/A.12(2 May 12, 1993 Maintenance of Cash Reserve and Statutory 4)/92/93 Liquid Assets under Sections 18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) read with Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - Levy of Penal Interest for Default 28 UBD.No.BR.48, July 14, 1993 Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 49/16.11.00/93-94 1934 - Returns in Form 'B' - Exempted Categories of Deposits from Maintenance of Reserve Requirements 29 UBD.No.155/16.26.00/ January 25, Section 18 & 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 93-94 1994 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) – Penalty 34 30 UBD.No.Cir.(SUC)No. February 08, Maintenance of Liquid Assets under Section 24 of 158/16.26.00/93-94 1994 the Banking Regulation Act (As Applicable to Co- operative Societies) - Submission of Daily Position along with Return in Form I 31 UBD.Cir February 08, Maintenance of Cash Reserve and Statutory (PCB)No.53/16.26.00/ 1994 Liquid Assets under Sections 18 and 24 93-94 respectively of Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) - Submission of Daily Position along with the Return in Form I 32 UBD.BR.44/16.26.00/9 July 22, 1994 Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio and 4-95 Statutory Liquidity Ratio 33 UBD.No.BR.2/16.26.00 November Auction of Government Stock 2002, for which the /94-95 24, 1994 Payment is made in Instalments 34 UBD.BR.3/16.26.4/94- December Cash Balances Required to be Maintained by 95 13, 1994 Scheduled Primary Co-operative Banks 35 UBD.BR.379/16.11.00/ December Section 42(1) of the RBI Act, 1934 - Returns in 94-95 13, 1994 Form 'B' - Exempted Categories of Deposits from Maintenance of Reserve Requirements 36 UBD.No.BR.122/16.11. December Notification 00/94-95 13, 1994 37 UBD.No.BR.35/16.04.0 December Netting Concept for Reserve Requirements - 0/94-95 31, 1994 Dealings with Securities Trading Corporation of India Limited (STCI) 38 UBD.No.CO.(Br).SUB. March 28, Cash Balances Required to be Maintained by 5/16.26.00/94-95 1995 Scheduled Primary Co-operative Banks 39 UBD.No.Cir.63/16.26.0 June 16, Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As applicable to 0/94-95 1995 Co-operative Societies) - Section 24 - Investment in Government and Other Approved Securities by Primary Co-operative Banks 40 UBD.No.CO(BR)3/16.0 September Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934

5.00/95-96 29, 1995 - Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) - Maintenance of Minimum Level of 85 percent on a Daily Basis 41 UBD.No.BR.AD.1/16.1 November Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on Non-resident 1.00/95-96 02, 1995 (Non-Repatriable) Rupee Deposit (NRNR) Scheme 42 UBD.No.BR.SUB.2/16. November Cash Reserve Ratio on Deposits under Non- 11.00/95-96 02, 1995 Resident (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE Accounts) 43 UBD.No.BR/130/16.11. November Notification 00/95-96 02, 1995 44 UBD.No.BR.131/16.11. November Notification 00/95-96 02, 1995 45 UBD.No.BR/AD/2/16.1 November Cash Reserve Ratio on Foreign Currency (Non- 1.00/95-96 11, 1995 Resident) Accounts (Banks) Scheme 46 UBD.No.BR.132/16.11. November Notification 00/95-96 11, 1995 35 47 UBD.No.BR.AD- December Cash Reserve Ratio on Foreign Currency Non- 4/16.11.00/95-96 06, 1995 Resident Accounts (Banks) FCNR(B) Scheme 48 UBD.No.BR.134/16.11. December Notification 00/95-96 06, 1995 49 UBD.No.BR.Cir.33/16. January 03, Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As applicable to

26.00/95-96 1996 Co-operative Societies) Section 24 - Investment in Government and Other Approved Securities by Primary Co-operative Banks 50 UBD.No.BR.AD- January 03, Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on Non-resident 5/16.11.00/95-96 1996 (Non-Repatriable) Rupee Deposit (NRNR) Scheme and on Foreign Currency Non-Resident Accounts (Banks) FCNR(B) Scheme 51 UBD.No.BR.137/16.11. January 06, Notification 00/95-96 1996 52 UBD.No.BR.136/16.11. January 06, Notification 00/95-96 1996 53 UBD.No.BR.SUB.5/16. April 03, Cash Reserve Ratio on Deposits under Non- 11.00/95-96 1996 Resident (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE Accounts) 54 UBD.No.BR.139/16.11. April 03, Notification 00/95-96 1996 55 UBD.No.BR.70/16.04.0 June 29, Netting Concept for Reserve Requirements - 0/95-96 1996 Dealings with Primary Dealers 56 UBD.No.BR.AD/18/16. April 15, Section 42 (1A) of the Reserve Bank of India Act,

11.00/96-97 1997 1934 - Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on Foreign Currency Non-Resident Accounts (Banks) [(FCNR)(B)] Scheme, Non-Resident (Non- Repatriable) Rupee Deposit (NRNR) Scheme and Non-Resident (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE Accounts) Scheme 57 UBD.No.BR/142/16.11. April 15, Notification 00/96-97 1997 58 UBD.No.BR.PCB.CIR. April 15, Penal Rate of Interest on the Shortfalls in the 53/16.11.00/96-97 1997 Maintenance of CRR/SLR 59 UBD.No.BR.SUB.12/1 April 15, Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 6.11.00/96-97 1997 1934 - Change of Cash Reserve Ratio on Liabilities to the Banking System 60 UBD.BR.No.145/16.11. April 15, Notification 00/96-97 1997 61 UBD.No.BR.SUB.10/1 April 15, Section 42 (1A) of the Reserve Bank of India Act,

6.11.00/96-97 1997 1934 - Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on Non- Resident (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE Accounts) Scheme 62 UBD.No.BR/143/16.11. April 15, Notification 00/96-97 1997 63 UBD.No.BR.16/16.04.0 November Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 0/97-98 06, 1997 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 36 64 UBD.No.BR.PCB.CIR. November Penal Rate of Interest on the Shortfalls in the 17/16.11.00/97-98 06, 1997 Maintenance of CRR / SLR 65 UBD.No.BR.SUB.18/1 December Section 42(1A) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 6.11.00/97-98 02, 1997 1934 - Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on Non- Resident (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE) Accounts Scheme 66 UBD.No.BR.147/16.11. December Notification 00/97-98 02, 1997 67 UBD.No.BR.AD.4/16.1 December Section 42(A) of the Reserve Bank of India Act,

1.00/97-98 02, 1997 1934 - Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on Foreign Currency Non-Resident Accounts (Banks) [FCNR(B)] Scheme, Non-Resident (Non- Repatriable) Rupee Deposits (NRNR) Scheme and Non-Resident (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE Accounts) Scheme 68 UBD.BR.146/16.11.00/ December Notification 97-98 02, 1997 69 UBD.No.BR.PCB.CIR. January 16, Penal Rate of Interest on the Shortfall in the 36/16.11.00/97-98 1998 Maintenance of CRR/SLR 70 UBD.No.44/16.24.00/9 March 18, Penal Rate of Interest on the Shortfall in the 7-98 1998 Maintenance of CRR/SLR 71 UBD.No.BR.PCB.CIR. April 11, Penal Rate of Interest on the Shortfall in the 51/16.26.00/97-98 1998 Maintenance of CRR/SLR 72 UBD.No.BR.PCB.CIR. April 29, Penal Rate of Interest on the Shortfall in the 52/16.26.00/97-98 1998 Maintenance of CRR/SLR 73 UBD.No.(Cir)BR.60/16. May 25, 1998 Sections 18 and 24 of the B.R. Act, 1949 (AACS)

26.00/97-98 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquidity Ratio and Submission of Return in Form I 74 UBD.No.BR.PCB.CIR. March 01, Penal Rate of Interest on the Shortfall in the 21/16.26.00/98-99 1999 Maintenance of CRR/SLR 75 UBD.No.BSD- April 23, Inter-branch Accounts - Old Outstandings Credit I.28/12.05.01/98-99 1999 Entries 76 UBD.No.BR.13A/16.11 October 29, Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, .00/99-2000 1999 1934 77 UBD.No.BR.4/16.11.00 October 29, Notification /99-2000 1999 78 UBD.No.3/16.11.000/9 October 29, Notification 9-2000 1999 79 UBD.No.CO.BR.6/16.2 April 27, Cash balances required to be maintained by 6.00/99-2000 2000 Scheduled Primary (urban) Co-operative Banks 80 UBD.No.BR.Cir/42/16. April 19, Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to

26.00/2000-01 2001 Co-operative Societies) - Section 24 - Investment in Government and other Approved Securities by Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) 81 UBD.No.UBD.CO.BR.0 April 19, Section 42 (1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 6/16.04.00/2000-2001 2001 1934 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio 37 82 UBD.No.BR.6/16.26- August 09, Banking Regulation Act, 1949(AACS) Section 24 - 00/2000-2001 2001 Investment in Government and Other approved securities by Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) 83 UBD.BR.CIR.6/16.11.0 October 22, Section 42(l) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - 0/2001-02 2001 Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) by Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks 84 UBD.BR.Cir.19/16.26.0 October 22, Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to 0/2001-02 2001 Co-operative Societies) Section 24 - Investment in Government and other approved securities by Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) 85 UBD.BR.CIR.11/16.11. April 29, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 00/2001-02 2002 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) by Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks 86 UBD.BR.17/16.11.00/2 April 29, Notification 001-02 2002 87 UBD.No.BR.Cir.12/16. May 20, 2002 Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934

11.00/2001-02 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) by Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks 88 UBD.No.BR.18/16.11.0 May 20, 2002 Notification 0/2001/02 89 UBD.No.BR.7/16.11.00 December Section 42 of the RBI Act, 1934 - Payment of /2002-03 12, 2002 Interest on Eligible CRR Balances on Monthly Basis 90 UBD.No.BP.Cir.10/16. April 29, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 11.00/2002-03 2003 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) by Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks 91 UBD.No.BP.23/16.11.0 April 29, Notification 0.2002-03 2003 92 UBD(PCB).Cir.No.31/1 February 17, Banking Regulation Act 1949 (AACS) - 6.26.00/2005-06 2006 Investments in Government and Other Approved Securities by UCBs - Exemption under Section 24A 93 UBD.(PCB)Cir.No.59/1 June 22, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 6.26.000/2005-2006 2006 - Maintenance of CRR 94 UBD.(PCB)No.13275/1 June 22, Notification

6.26.000//2005- 2006 2006 95 UBD.PCB.Cir.No.60/16 June 22, Maintenance of CRR on Exempted Categories .26.000/2005-2006 2006 96 UBD (PCB) June 22, Notification No.13276/16.26.000/2 2006 005-2006 97 UBD.(PCB- August 16, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 )Cir.No.6/16.26.000/20 2006 - Maintenance of CRR 06-2007 38 98 UBD(PCB)Cir.No.22/1 December Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934- 6.26.000/2006-2007 11, 2006 Maintenance of CRR 99 UBD (PCB) December NOTIFICATION on CRR No.22/16.26.000/2006- 11, 2006 2007 100 UBD(PCB)No.2/12.03. February 14, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 000/2006-07 2007 - Maintenance of CRR 101 UBD(PCB) February 14, NOTIFICATION on CRR No.2/12.03.000/2006- 2007 07 102 UBD(PCB)Cir.No.4/12. March 01, Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on

03.000/2006-07 2007 Exempted Categories 103 UBD(PCB)No/4/12.03. March 01, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 000/2006-07 2007 Ratio (CRR) on Exempted Categories 104 UBD(PCB).No./3/12.03 March 01, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2006-07 2007 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 105 UBD(PCB).No.3/12.03. March 01, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 000/2006-07 2007 Ratio (CRR) 106 UBD(PCB).No./5/12.03 April 05, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2006-07 2007 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 107 UBD(PCB)No./5/12.03. April 05, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 000/2006-07 2007 Ratio (CRR) 108 UBD.(PCB).Cir.No./6/1 April 25, Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on

2.03.000/2006-07 2007 Exempted Categories 109 UBD(PCB).No./7/12.03 April 25, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2006-07 2007 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 110 UBD(PCB).No.9/12.03. July 31, 2007 Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 000/2007-08 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 111 UBD (PCB) No. July 31, 2007 NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 9/12.03.000/2007-08 Ratio (CRR) 112 UBD(PCB).No./3/12.03 November Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2007-08 11, 2007 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 113 UBD(PCB) November NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve No./10/12.03.000/2007 11, 2007 Ratio (CRR) -08 114 UBD(PCB).No./4/12.03 April 22, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2007-08 2008 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 115 UBD(PCB)No/11/12.03 April 22, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve .000/2007-08 2008 Ratio (CRR) 116 UBD(PCB).No./5/12.03 April 30, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2007-08 2008 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 39 117 UBD(PCB)No/12/12.03 April 30, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve .000/2007-08 2008 Ratio (CRR) 118 UBD(PCB).No./6/12.03 June 26, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2007-08 2008 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 119 UBD(PCB)No/13/12.03 June 26, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve .000/2007-08 2008 Ratio (CRR) 120 UBD.BPD(PCB)Cir.No. July 11, 2008 Balances held by UCBs with IDBI Bank Limited - 3/12.05.001/2008-09 Treatment for CRR / SLR Purpose 121 UBD(PCB).No./1/12.03 July 31, 2008 Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2008-09 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 122 UBD(PCB)No/1/12.03. July 31, 2008 NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 000/2008-09 Ratio (CRR) 123 UBD.CO.BPD.(PCB).N September Treatment of Deposits with DCCB / SCB as SLR o.20/12.05.001/2008- 30, 2008 09 124 UBD(PCB).No./4/12.03 October 07, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2008-09 2008 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 125 UBD(PCB)No/2/12.03. October 07, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 000/2008-09 2008 Ratio (CRR) 126 UBD(PCB).No./5/12.03 October 10, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 .000/2008-09 2008 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 127 UBD(PCB)No/3/12.03. October 10, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 000/2008-09 2008 Ratio (CRR) 128 UBD.(PCB).No./7/12.0 October 16, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934

3.000/2008-09 2008 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 129 UBD(PCB)No/6/12.03. October 16, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 000/2008-09 2008 Ratio (CRR) 130 UBD(PCB)CO.BPD.Cir November Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to .No.28/16.26.00/2008- 26, 2008 Co-operative Societies) Section 24 - Investment 09 in Government and Other approved Securities by Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) 131 UBD.PCB.10/16.26.00 November Notification on Banking Regulation Act 1949 0/2008-2009 26, 2008 (AACS) - Investments in Government and Other Approved Securities by UCBs - Exemption under Section 24A 132 UBD.(PCB).No./9/12.0 January 05, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 3.000/2008-09 2009 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 133 UBD.(PCB).No/12/12.0 January 05, NOTIFICATION on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 3.000/2008-09 2009 Ratio (CRR) 134 UBD.(PCB).Cir.No.37/ January 21, Banking Regulation Act 1949 (AACS) - 16.26.000/2008-09 2009 Investments in Government and Other Approved Securities by UCBs - Exemption under Section

24A 135 UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.N January 29, Balances held by UCBs with IDBI Bank Limited - o.41/12.05.001/2008- 2009 Treatment for CRR / SLR Purpose 09 40 136 UBD.(PCB).Cir.No.1/1 November Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on 2.03.003/2009-10 09, 2009 Exempted Categories 137 UBD.(PCB).No/1/12.03 February 01, UCBs - Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India .000/2009-10 2010 Act, 1934 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 138 UBD.(PCB).No./2/12.0 February 01, Notification on Maintenance of Cash Reserve 3.000/2009-10 2010 Ratio (CRR) 139 UBD.(PCB).No./3/12.0 April 21, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 3.000/2009-10 2010 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 140 UBD.(PCB).No./2/12.0 April 21, Notification on Maintenance of Cash Reserve

3.000/2009-10 2010 Ratio (CRR) 141 UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR. January 25, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 No.2/12.03.000/2011- 2012 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 12 142 UBD.BPD.(PCB).DIR. January 25, Notification on Maintenance of Cash Reserve No.6/12.03.000/2011- 2012 Ratio (CRR) 12 143 UBD.BPD.(SCB).Cir.N March 09, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 o.3/12.03.000/2011-12 2012 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 144 UBD.BPD.(SCB). March 09, Notification on Maintenance of Cash Reserve DIR.No.7/12.03.000/20 2012 Ratio (CRR) 11-12 145 UBD.BPD.(SCB).CIR. September Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 No.1/12.03.000/2012- 17, 2012 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 13 146 UBD.BPD.(SCB).DIR. September Notification on Maintenance of Cash Reserve No.2/12.03.000/2012- 17, 2012 Ratio (CRR) 13 147 UBD.BPD.(SCB).CIR. October 30, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 No.2/12.03.000/2012- 2012 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 13 148 UBD.BPD.(SCB).No.3/ October 30, Notification on Maintenance of Cash Reserve

12.03.000/2012-13 2012 Ratio (CRR) 149 UBD.BPD.(SCB).CIR. January 30, Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 No.3/12.03.000/2012- 2013 - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 13 150 UBD.BPD.(SCB).No.4/ January 30, Notification on Maintenance of Cash Reserve

12.03.000/2012-13 2013 Ratio (CRR) 151 UBD.BPD.(SCB).CIR. July 24, 2013 Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, No.1/12.03.000/2013- 1934 - Change in Daily Minimum Cash Reserve 14 Maintenance Requirement 152 UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR. August 27, Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, No.5/13.01.000/2013- 2013 1934 and Section 18 and 24 of the Banking 14 Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS) - FCNR (B) / NRE Deposits - Exemption from Maintenance of CRR / SLR and Exclusion from ABC for Priority Sector Lending 41 153 UBD.BPD.(SCB).CIR. September Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 No.2/12.03.000/2013- 20, 2013 - Change in Daily Minimum Cash Reserve 14 Maintenance Requirement 154 UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.N June 05, The Banking Laws (Amendment) Act 2012 - o.68/16.26.000/2013- 2014 Amendments to Section 18 & 24 of Banking 14 Regulation (B.R.) Act, 1949 (AACS) - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for Non-Scheduled UCBs and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for UCBs 155 UBD.BPD.(PCB).Not.N June 05, Notification on The Banking Laws (Amendment) o.1/16.26.000/2013-14 2014 Act 2012 - Amendments to Section 18 & 24 of Banking Regulation (B.R.) Act, 1949 (AACS) - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for Non-Scheduled UCBs and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for UCBs 156 UBD.BPD.(PCB).Not.N June 05, Notification on The Banking Laws (Amendment) o.2/16.26.000/2013-14 2014 Act 2012 - Amendments to Section 18 & 24 of Banking Regulation (B.R.) Act, 1949 (AACS) - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for Non-Scheduled UCBs and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for UCBs 157 UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.N June 11, Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, o.72/13.01.000/2013- 2014 1934 and Section 18 & 24 of the Banking 14 Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS) - FCNR (B) / NRE Deposits - Exemption from Maintenance of CRR / SLR and Exclusion from ABC for Priority Sector Lending (RPCD Circulars) S.No. Date of circular Subject Matter 1 RPCD.No.CRRB.403/G.83- The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - Section 42(2) and 84 dated August 5, 1983 the Reserve Bank of India Scheduled Banks Regulations, 1951 - Regulation 6 - Modifications of Form 'B' (Form of weekly statement to be submitted by a Scheduled state Co-operative Bank to the Reserve Bank of India) 2 RPCD.No.CRRB.1266/G.1- Submission of Weekly Returns in Form 'B' to the Reserve 83/84 dated November 17, Bank of India by Non-scheduled State Co-operative 1983 Banks 3 RPCD.No.CRRB.1340/G.83 The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - Section 42(2) and -84 dated November 24, the Reserve Bank of India Scheduled Banks' 1983 Regulations, 1951 - Regulation 6 - Modifications in Form 'B' (Form of Weekly Statement to be Submitted by a Scheduled State Co-operative Bank to the Reserve Bank of India) 4 RPCD.No.CRRB.3634/A.20 Maintenance of Minimum Average Daily Balance under (24)-83/84 dated May 18, Section 42 (1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 1984 42 5 RPCD.No.CRRB.985/324- Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory 84/85 dated November 23, Liquidity Ratio (SLR) 1984 6 RPCD.No.RF.367/A.6-85 Amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Scheduled dated March 11, 1985 Banks Regulations , 1951 7 RPCD.No.BC.41/07.02.01/9 Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - Cash 5-96 dated September 29, Reserve Ratio (CRR) - Maintenance of Minimum Level of 1995 85 Per cent on a Daily Basis 8 RPCD.STAT.No.BC.34/11.0 Section 42 (2) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 -

2.01/98-99 dated November Return in Form 'A' for RRBs and Form 'B' for Scheduled 10, 1998 State Co-operative Banks 9 RPCD.No.RF.BC.44/07.02. Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 01/99-2000 dated December 08, 1999 10 RPCD.No.RF.BC.87/07.02. Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory 03/99-2000 dated May 03, Liquidity Ratio (SLR) 2000 11 RPCD.No.RF.BC.75/07.02. Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - 01/2000-01 dated April 19, Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) - Relaxation 2001 in Daily Minimum Cash Reserve Ratio Maintenance Requirement 12 RPCD.Cir.RF.BC.49/07.02. Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - 05/2001-02 dated Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) by December 31, 2001 Scheduled State Co-operative Banks 13 RPCD.RF.BC.59/07.02.01/2 Section 42(1) of RBI Act 1934 - Maintenance of Cash 001-2002 dated January 30, Reserve Ratio (CRR) by Scheduled State Co-operative 2002 Banks (Sch.SCBs)/Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) 14 RPCD.No.RF.BC.35/07.02. Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - 01/2002-03 dated October Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) - Changes in 29, 2002 Daily Minimum CRR Maintenance Requirement 15 RPCD.CO.No.RF.BC.55/7.0 Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 -

2.01/2002-03 dated Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) - Changes in December 26, 2002 Daily Minimum CRR - Maintenance Requirement 16 RPCD.CO.RF.BC.53/07.02. Maintenance of CRR / SLR on Transaction in 01/2005-06 dated Collateralised Borrowing and Lending Obligation (CBLO) December 8, 2005 17 RPCD.RF.BC.93/07.02.01/2 Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - 005-2006 dated June 22, Maintenance of CRR 2006 18 RPCD.RF.BC.94/07.02.01/2 Maintenance of CRR on Exempted Categories 005-2006 dated June 22, 2006 43 19 RPCD.RF.BC.17/07.02.01/2 Section 42 (1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - 006-07 dated August 11, Penalties on Default in Maintenance of Cash Reserve 2006 Ratio (CRR) 20 RPCD.RF.BC.54/07.02.01/2 Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 - 006-07 dated March 02, Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 2007 21 RPCD.CO.RF.BC.No.64/07. Section 42 (1) of RBI Act, 1934 - Maintenance of Cash 02.01/2006-07 dated April Reserve Ratio (CRR) 4, 2007 22 RPCD.CO.RF.BC.No.75/07. Section 42(1) of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 -

02.01/2006-07 dated April Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) 24, 2007 23 RPCD.CO.RF.BC.No.77/07. Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) on Exempted 02.01/2006-07 dated April Categories 24, 2007 24 RPCD.CO.RRB/RCB.BC.N Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, o.83/03.05.33/2013-14 Section 24 of Banking Regulation Act 1949 and Section dated February 11, 2014 18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS) - FCNR(B) / NRE deposits - Exemption from Maintenance of CRR / SLR and Exclusion from Outstanding Advances for Priority Sector Lending for RRBs 25 RPCD.RCB.BC.No.110/07. The Banking Laws (Amendment) Act 2012 - 51.020/2013-14 dated June Amendments to Section 18 & 24 of Banking Regulation 5, 2014 (B.R.) Act, 1949 (AACS) - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for Non-Scheduled StCBs and CCBs and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for StCBs and CCBs 26 RPCD.RCB.BC.No.16/07.5 Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 - Amendments to

1.020/2014-15 dated July Sections 18 & 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 21, 2014 (AACS) - Maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for Non-Scheduled StCBs and CCBs and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) for StCBs and CCBs. 27 RPCD.CO.RCB.RRB.BC.N Section 42 (1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934- o.61/03.05.33/2012-13 Maintenance of CRR dated January 29, 2013 All approvals/acknowledgements given under the above circulars shall be deemed as given under these directions. 44 List of Abbreviations ACU Asian Clearing Union ATM Automated Teller Machine BAF Bankers' Acceptance Facility CRR Cash Reserve Ratio DD Demand Draft DICGC Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation DRDA District Rural Development Agency DTL Demand and Time Liabilities EC Eligible Credit ECGC Export Credit Guarantee Corporation EXIM Bank Export and Import Bank FALLCR Facility to Avail Liquidity for Liquidity Coverage Ratio FCNR(B) Foreign Currency Non Resident (Bank) Account GBP Great British Pound HQLA High Quality Liquid Assets IBFC Inter-Bank Foreign Currency IBU International Financial Service Centre(IFSC) Banking Unit INR Indian Rupee JPY Japanese Yen LAF Liquidity Adjustment Facility LB Long-Term Bonds LCR Liquidity Coverage Ratio MSF Marginal Standing Facility MT Mail Transfer NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development NaBFID National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd. NDTL Net Demand and Time Liabilities NHB National Housing Bank NRE Non-Resident External OBU Offshore Banking Units ODTL Other Demand and Time Liabilities RIDF Rural Infrastructure Development Fund RRB Regional Rural Bank SCB Scheduled Commercial Bank SDF Standing Deposit Facility SDL State Development Loan SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India SLR Statutory Liquidity Ratio TT Telegraphic Transfer USD US Dollar 45 Annex – I Form A (To be submitted by a scheduled bank which is not a Co-operative bank) Statement of position at the close of business on Friday1------- (Rupees rounded off to the nearest thousand) Name of the Bank: I. Liabilities to the Banking System in India 2 a) Demand and time deposits from Banks b) Borrowings from Banks3 c) Other Demand and Time Liabilities4 Total of I II. Liabilities to Others in India a) Aggregate Deposits (Other than from Banks)

(i) Demand (ii) Time b) Borrowings5 c) Other demand and time liabilities Total of II Total of I + II III. Assets with the Banking System in India a) Balances with Banks (i) In current account (ii) In other accounts b) Money at call and short notice c) Advances to banks i.e., dues from banks d) Other Assets Total of III IV. Cash in India (i.e., cash in hand) V. Investments in India (at book value) a) Central and State Governments securities including Treasury Bills, Treasury Deposits Receipts, Treasury Savings Deposit Certificates and Postal obligations b) Other approved Securities Total of V 46 VI. Bank Credit in India (excluding inter-bank advances) a) Loans, cash credits and overdrafts b) Inland Bills purchased and discounted (i) Bills Purchased (ii) Bills Discounted c) Foreign Bills purchased and discounted

(i) Bills purchased (ii) Bills discounted Total of VI Total of (III+IV+V+VI) A. Net liabilities for the purpose of Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 = Net Liability to the Banking System + Liabilities to Others in India i.e.,(I-III) +II, if (I-III) is a plus figure or II only, If (I-III) is a minus figure. B. Savings Bank Account (vide Regulation 7) i) Demand Liabilities in India ii) Time Liabilities in India Place: Date: 1 Where Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) for one or more offices of a Scheduled bank, the return shall give the preceding working day's figure in respect of such office or offices, but shall nevertheless be deemed to relate to that Friday. 2 The expression "Banking System" or "Banks" wherever it appears in the return means the banks and any other financial institutions referred to in sub-clause (i) to (vi)of clause (d) of the Explanation below Section 42 (1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. . 3 In case of RRBs, apart from the sponsor bank. 47 4 If it is not possible to provide the figure against I(c) separately from II(c), the same may be included in the figure against II(c).In such a case, the net liability to the banking system will be worked out as the excess, if any of the aggregate of 1(a) and 1(b) over the aggregate of III. 5 Other than from Reserve Bank of India, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and Export-Import Bank of India. 48 Memorandum to Form A

1. Paid-up Capital 1.1 Reserves 2. Time Deposits 2.1 Short-term 2.2 Long-term 3. Certificates of Deposits 4. Net Demand and Time Liabilities (After deduction of liabilities under zero reserve prescription, Annex A) 5. Amount of Deposits required to be maintained as per current rate of CRR 6. Any other liability on which CRR is required to be maintained as per current RBI instructions under section 42 and 42(1A) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 7. Total CRR required to be maintained under Section 42 and 42(1A) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 49 Annex A Name of the Bank: (Amount in Rupees rounded off to the nearest thousand) Outstanding Revaluation Interest Items at value Book value 1 2 3 4 FOREIGN CURRENCY LIABILITIES Foreign Currency Liabilities to others In India I. Non-Resident Deposits (I.1+I.2+I.3+I.4) I.1Non-Resident External Rupee Account (NRE) I.2Non-Resident Ordinary Deposits (NRO) I.3Foreign Currency Non-Resident Banks Scheme (FCNR(B}](1.3.1+1.3.2) I.3.1Short-term 1 I.3.2 Long-term2 I.4 Others (to be specified) II. Foreign Currency Other Deposits/Schemes

(II.1+II.2+II.3+II.4+II.5+II.6) II.1 Exchange Earner's Foreign Currency II.2 Resident Foreign Currency Accounts (II.2.1+II.2.2) II.2.1 Resident Foreign Currency (Old Scheme) II.2.2 Resident Foreign Currency (Domestic) (New Scheme) II.3 ESCROW Accounts by Indian Exporters II.4 Foreign Credit Line for Pre-shipment Credit account and Overseas Rediscounting of Bills 50 II.5 Credit Balances in ACU(US dollar) Account II.6 Others (to be specified) III. Foreign Currency Liabilities to the Banking System In India(III.1+III.2) III.1 Inter-bank Foreign Currency Deposits III.2 Inter-bank Foreign Currency Borrowings IV. Overseas Borrowings3 FOREIGN CURRENCY ASSETS 1.Assets with the banking system in India 1.1 Foreign Currency lending 1.2 Others 2. Assets with others In India 2.1 Bank Credit In India In Foreign Currency4 2.2 Others

3. Overseas foreign currency assets5 of which, balances held in cash component of Nostro account Amount in Rupees Rounded off to the Nearest thousand V. External Liabilities to Others subject to Differential/zero CRR prescription (I+II) VI. External liabilities fully subject to CRR prescription (IV) VII.Net Inter-Bank Liabilities(I-III of Form A) VIII. Any other liabilities coming within the purview of zero prescription VIII.1 Market Repos in government securities including TREPS VIII.2 IBU VIII.3 OBU VIII.4 Minimum of EC or LB VIII.5 Incentivising Bank Credit to Specific Sectors- Circular dated February 10, 2020 VIII.6 FCNR (B) Deposits - Circular dated July 06, 2022 51 VIII.7 NRE Term deposits - Circular dated July 06, 2022 VIII.8 Other Liabilities under Zero Prescription IX. Liabilities subject to zero CRR prescription (V+VII+VIII) Memo items 1. Inter Bank Liabilities 1.1 Total Inter Bank Liabilities 1.2 Less: Term liabilities (Maturity>= 15 days and up to 1 year) 1.3 Net (1.1-1.2) 2. Inter Bank Assets 2.1 Total Inter Bank Assets 2.2 Less: Term assets(Maturity>= 15 days and up to 1 year) 2.3 Net (2.1-2.2)

3. ACU Dollar Funds 1 of contractual maturity of one year or less. 2 of contractual maturity of more than one year. 3 Pertains to the portion not swapped into Rupees. 4 Loans out of FCNR (B) deposits. 5 Include (i) balances held abroad (i.e., cash component of Nostro account. debit balances in ACU (US dollar) account and credit balances in the commercial banks of ACU countries) (ii) short term foreign deposits and investments in eligible securities, (iii) foreign money market instruments including Treasury Bills and (iv) foreign shares and bonds. Signature of Authorised Officials) ( 1. (Designation) 2. (Designation) 52 Annex B Name of the Bank: (Amount in Rupees rounded off to the nearest thousand) Items Outstanding at Revaluation book value value 1 2 3 I. Investments in Approved Securities(I.1+I.2) I.1 Investment in Government securities (I.1.1+I.1.2=Item V(a) of Form A) I.1.1 Short Term1 I.1.2 Long Term2 I.2 Investment in other approved Securities (1.2 =Item V(b) of Form A) (As and when prescribed) I.3 Investment in other Government Securities (Non- SLR) II Investments in other Securities

(II.1+II.2+II.3+II.4) Investments in : II.1 Commercial Paper II.2 Units of Mutual Funds II.3 Shares issued by - II.3.1 Public Sector Undertakings II.3.2 Private Corporate Sector II.3.3 Public Financial Institutions II.3.4 Others (to be specified) II.4 Bonds/debentures/security receipts/ Pass Through Certificates issued by - II.4.1 Public Sector Undertakings II.4.2 Private Corporate Sector 53 II.4.3 Public Financial Institutions II.4.4 Others (to be specified) III Deposits towards Priority Sector Lending shortfall (RIDF, SIDBI etc.) Memo Items 1. Subscriptions to shares/debentures/bonds in the Primary market. 2.Subscriptions through Private Placements 3.Of item no. (I.1 +I.2) above, securities pledged for borrowings (a+b+c+d+e): a) under RBI-LAF repo/term repo b) under MSF c) under FALLCR d) under market repo/other borrowings e) contribution to Settlement Guarantee Funds (SGFs) and other similar funds 1 of contractual maturity of one year or less 2 of contractual maturity of more than one year. (Signature of Authorised Officials) 1. (Designation) 2. (Designation) 54 Annex – II THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949

FORM VIII (Rule 13 A) (Section 18 and 24) (For Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs), Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), Small Finance Banks , Payments Bank and Local Area Banks(LAB)) 1. Name of the banking company: 2. Name and designation of the officer submitting the return: 3. Statement of demand and time liabilities and cash, gold and unencumbered approved securities for the month of _____________: (To be furnished to the Reserve Bank not later than 20 days after the end of the month to which it relates) (Rounded off to the nearest thousand rupees) As at the close of business on First Second Third alternate alternate alternate Friday@ Friday@ Friday@ PART - A I. Liabilities in India to the Banking System (excluding any loan taken by a Regional Rural Bank from its sponsor Bank) (a) Demand Liabilities (i) Balances in current accounts of the State Bank of India and corresponding new banks 55 (ii) Other demand liabilities (b) Time Liabilities Total of I II. Liabilities in India to others(excluding borrowings from the Reserve Bank, Export-Import Bank of India and National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development) (a) Demand Liabilities

(b) Time Liabilities Total of II III Cash in hand IV. Balances in current account with the Reserve Bank V. Assets in India with the Banking System (a) Balances in current account with (i) The State Bank of India and corresponding new banks. (ii) Other banks and Notified financial Institutions (b) Balances in other accounts with banks and notified financial institutions (c) Money at call and short notice (d) Advances to banks (i.e., dues from banks) (e) other assets Total of V VI. Net balance in current accounts= V(a)(i) - I (a)(i) VII. Net liabilities for the purpose of Section18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949= Net liabilities to the Banking System+ Other demand and time liabilities= (I-V)+II if (I-V) is a plus figure 56 OR II only if (I-V) is a minus figure PART – B(For non-scheduled banks only) VIII. Minimum amount of cash reserve required to be maintained under Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (such per cent of VII as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight as specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time.) IX . Cash reserve actually maintained = Total of III, IV and VI X. Excess of IX over VIII

PART - C XI. Minimum amount of assets required to be maintained under Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (such percent of VII as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight as specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time). XII. (a) Balance required to be maintained by a scheduled bank under Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. (b) Balance actually maintained by a scheduled bank with the Reserve Bank (c) Excess of (b) over (a) XIII. Assets actually maintained (a) Amount in cash deposited with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated outside India under Section 11(2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (b) Cash in hand or in the case of a 57 non-scheduled bank, excess of IX over VIII, if any, shown against X above (c) Excess balance with the Reserve Bank, if any shown against XII (c) above (d) Net balance in current account maintained by a scheduled bank = VI above (e) Balances maintained by a Regional Rural Bank in call or fixed deposit with its Sponsor Bank (f) Gold valued at a price not exceeding the current market price (g) Unencumbered approved securities valued on the basis of the method of valuation determined by the Reserve Bank

(h) Approved securities deposited with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated outside India under section 11 (2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, valued on the basis of the method of valuation determined by the Reserve Bank Total of (a) to (h) XIV. XIII-XI (Excess+, deficit-) Dated Signature Note: For the purposes of this return, the expressions “Banking System" shall mean the State Bank of India,corresponding new banks, Regional Rural Banks, other banking companies, co-operative banks and financial institutions notified by the Central Government under clause (d) of the Explanation to section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act,1949. @ Give dates (where Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881), give the date as on the preceding working day) 58 Annex - III Form 'B' [To be submitted by a Scheduled co-operative bank Statement of Position as at the Close of Business on Friday @ the _________ (Rupees rounded off to the nearest Thousand) Name of the Bank : I. Liabilities to the Banking System in India* (a) Demand and time deposits from banks* (i) Demand (ii) Time (b) Borrowings from banks *

(c) Other demand and time liabilities @@ Total of I II. Liabilities to Others in India (a) Aggregate deposits (other than from banks* and also other than any deposit of money representing the reserve fund or any part thereof maintained by any co- operative society within the State Co-operative bank's area of operation) (i) Demand (ii) Time (b) Borrowings (other than Reserve Bank of India, Industrial Development Bank of India, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Export-Import Bank of India, the State Government and the National Co- operative Development Corporation, State Co-operative Bank of the State concerned or the District Central Co- operative Bank of the District concerned) (c) Other demand and time liabilities 59 Total of II Total of I + II III. Assets with the Banking System in India* (a) Balance with banks* (i) in current account (ii) in other accounts (b) Money at call and short notice (c) Advances to banks* i.e. due from banks* (d) Other assets Total of III IV. Cash in India (i.e. cash in hand) V. Investments in India (at book value)

(a) Central and State Government securities including treasury bills, treasury deposit receipts, treasury savings deposit certificates and postal obligations (b) Other approved securities Total of V VI. Bank Credit in India (excluding inter-bank advances) (a) Loans, cash credits and overdrafts (b) Inland bills purchased and discounted (i) Bills purchased (ii) Bills discounted (c) Foreign bills purchased and discounted (i) Bills purchased 60 (ii) Bills discounted Total of VI Total of III + IV + V + VI A. Net Liabilities for the purpose of Section 42 of (I - III) + II, if (I - III) is a plus Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 = Net Liability to the figure or II only, if Banking System + Liability to Others in India (I - IIII) is a minus figure B. Amount of minimum deposit required to be kept with = ` the Reserve Bank of India under the Act (rounded off to the nearest rupee) C. Savings Bank Account (vide Regulation 7) Demand liabilities in India Time liabilities in India Sd/- Signature of Officers 1. (Designation) ________________ 2. (Designation) ________________ Station : Date : 1. Borrowings in India from the Reserve Bank of India under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 Section :

(i) 17(2)(a) (ii) 17(2)(b) or (4)(c) (iii) 17(2)(bb) or (4)(c) (iv) 17(4)(c) (v) 17(4)(a) Total of item (1) 61 2. Borrowings from (i) National Bank under the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981 under Section : (a) 21 (b) 22 (c) 23 (d) 24 (e) 25 (ii) State Bank of India (iii) Other banks (iv) Industrial Development Bank of India (v) State Government (vi) National Co-operative Development Corporation (vii) Export-Import Bank of India (viii) State Co-operative Bank of the State concerned (ix) District Central Co-operative Bank of the District concerned Total of item (2)

3. Balance with the Reserve Bank of India Footnotes # Scheduled primary (urban) co-operative banks are also required to submit the statement in the same format. @ Where Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) for one or more offices of a scheduled State Co-operative bank, the Return shall give the preceding working day's figures in respect of such office or offices, but shall nevertheless be deemed to relate to that Friday. * The expression "Banking System" or "Banks" wherever it appears in the return means the banks and any other financial institutions referred to in regulations (i) to (v) of clause (e) of the Explanation below Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. @@ If it is not possible to provide the figure against I (c) separately from II(c), the same may be included in the figure against II (c). In such a case, the net liability to the banking system will be worked out as the excess, if any, of the aggregate of I(a) and I(b) over the aggregate of III --------------------------------------- 62

FORM I Annex - IV Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) & Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 Form - I (See Rule 5) [Sections 18(1) and 24(3)] [Vide paragraph …..] CRR for Non-Scheduled Co-operative Banks SLR –All Primary Co-operative Banks(Scheduled and Non-Scheduled) Name of the Co-operative Bank : Name(s) and Designation(s) of the Officer(s) submitted the Return : Statement of Demand and Time liabilities in India and Amount maintained in India in Cash, Gold and unencumbered Securities for the Month of ___________ The amounts of various items in this return should be worked out after taking into account, where necessary, the adjustments indicated in the footnotes at the end of the return. (Rounded off to the nearest Thousand Rupees) As at the close of Business on First Second Third Alternate Alternate Alternate Friday Friday Friday (Date) (Date) (Date) 1 2 3 4 Part – A I. Liabilities in India(£) to the banking system$ (a) Demand liabilities (i) Total of credit balances in current accounts maintained with the Co-operative Bank by the State Bank of India and corresponding new banks (ii) Total of other demand liabilities to the banking system

(b) Time liabilities to the banking system$ Total of I 63 II. Liabilities in India to others X (a) Demand liabilities (b) Time liabilities Total of II III. Assets in India with the banking system (a) Total of credit balances (%) in current accounts maintained with State Bank of India and corresponding new banks. (b) Total of other assets with the banking system, viz., (i) balances in all accounts other than those included in item III (a), (ii) money at call and short notice, (iii) advances, and (iv) any other assets. IV. Total (net) demand and time liabilities for the purposes of Sections 18 and 24 of the Act = (I-III) + II, if (I-III) is a plus figure, OR II only, if (I-III) is a minus figure V. Cash in hand (&) VI. Balances in current accounts with (a) Reserve Bank of India++ (b) State Co-operative Bank of the State concerned (+) (c) District Central Co-operative Bank of the district concerned (%) Total of VI VII Balances with all other types with (a) State Co-operative Bank of the State

(b) District Central Co-operative Bank Total of VII VIII Net balance in current accounts, i.e., excess of III(a) over I(a)(i) Part - B Information need not be furnished Compliance with Section 18 64 (Not applicable to scheduled State Co-operative Banks) IX. 4 per cent of IV as on the last Friday of the second } preceding fortnight } } } } } X. Cash reserve actually maintained = V + VI + VIII } Part - C : Compliance with Section 24 : } (Not applicable to scheduled State Co-operative Banks) } XI. -------- per cent (or a higher specified percentage) of IV as on } the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight } } XII. Assets actually maintained } (a) Cash and other balances maintained in India } X-IX + VII } } (b) Gold ££ (c) Unencumbered approved securities $$ } } Total of XII Part -D : Compliance with Section 24 : (Applicable to Scheduled / State Co-operative Banks) XIII -------- per cent (or a higher specified percentage) of IV as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight XIV Assets actually maintained (a) Cash in hand

(b) Balance maintained with the Reserve Bank of India in excess of the balance required to be maintained under Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 [i.e., VI(a)] (c) Net balance in current accounts (i.e., VIII) (d) Gold ££ (e) Unencumbered approved securities $$ (f) Balances of all other types with : 65 (i) State Co-op. Bank of the State concerned (+) (ii) District Central Co-op. Bank of the district concerned (X) Total of XIV Sd/- Signature Date: Footnotes 1. Return in this Form is to be submitted to the Reserve Bank of India under Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As application to co-operative societies) by scheduled State Co-operative Banks and Sections 18 and 24 of the Act ibid. by the other "Co-operative Banks" not later than 15 days after the end of the months to which it relates. 2. If an alternate Friday is a holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881), the figures as at the close of business on the preceding working day should be furnished. £. For the purposes of this return, "Liabilities in India" shall not include.

(i) The paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit balance in the profit and loss account of the Co- operative Bank - (ii) In the case of a State Co-operative Bank or a District Central Co-operative Bank, any deposit of money with it, representing the reserve fund or any part thereof maintained with it, by any other Co- operative Society within its area of operation; (iii) in the case of a District Central Co-operative Bank, any advance taken from the State co-operative bank of the State concerned; (iv) Any advance taken by a primary Co-operative Bank from the State Cooperative Bank of the State concerned or the District Central Co-operative Bank of the district concerned; (v) Amount of, any advance or other credit arrangement drawn and availed of by a Co-operative Bank against approved securities; (vi) In the case of any Co-operative Bank which has granted an advance against any balance maintained with it, such balance to the extent of the amount outstanding in respect of such advance. $ For the purpose of this return, the expression "Banking system" shall comprise the following banks and financial institutions, viz.

(v) Other financial institutions, if any, notified by the Central Government in this behalf under clause (d) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As applicable to co-operative societies). X. For the purpose of this return, "liabilities in India to others" shall not include borrowings from a State Government, the Reserve Bank, Industrial Development Bank of India, Export-Import Bank of India, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, or from the National Co-operative Development Corporation established under Section 3 of the National Co-operative Development Act, 1962. % (i) Any balance held by Co-operative Bank with another bank shall not, to the extent such balance represents the investment of Agricultural Credit Stabilisation Fund of such Co-operative Bank, be deemed to be cash maintained in India. (ii) In case the co-operative bank has taken an advance against any balance maintained with the State Co-operative bank of the State concerned or with the District Central Co-operative Bank of the district concerned, such balance to the extent to which it has been drawn against or availed of shall not be deemed to be such cash maintained in India. & (i) For the purpose of this return, any cash with a Co-operative Bank shall not, to the extent such cash represents the balance in Agricultural Credit Stabilisation Fund of such Co-operative Bank, be deemed to be cash maintained in India. (ii) Cash must not include balance with other banks or any item other than bank / currency notes, rupee coin (including one rupee notes) and subsidiary coins current on the date of this return. ++ Scheduled State Co-operative Banks should show here only the amount in excess of the balance required to be maintained with the Reserve Bank of India under Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. + Applicable to State industrial Co-operative Banks, District Central Co-operative Bank, District Industrial Co-operative Banks and Primary Co-operative Banks only.

X Applicable to primary Co-operative Banks only. $$ (i) Valued on the basis of the method of valuation determined by the Reserve Bank. (ii) Approved securities, or a portion thereof, representing investment of monies of Agricultural Credit Stabilisation Fund of a Co-operative Bank, shall not be deemed to be unencumbered approved securities. ££ Valued at a price not exceeding the current market price. --------------------------------------- 67 Annex – V Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) & Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) Monthly statement showing the daily position of maintenance of Cash Reserve under Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As applicable to Co-operative Societies) during the Month of _________ (Applicable to Non-Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks) Name of the Bank : (Rupees rounded off to the nearest Thousand) Amount of Cash Reserve Date Required to be Actually Deficit Surplus Remarks maintained maintained 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 68 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Signature of CEO : Name : Designation : NB : Where there is a public holiday under Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881), figures in respect of such day should relate to the preceding working day. 69 Annex – VI Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) & Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) Statement of Valuation of SLR Securities (Fortnight ended Friday ________) [Vide paragraph…] Name of the Bank : ______________________________________________________________________ (Rs. in Lakhs up to two Decimals) Net Value for Depreciation Particulars Face Value Book Value SLR Purpose (2- Held 3) Part I

1. 2. 3. 4. Government Securities Opening Balance Addition during the fortnight (+) Deduction during the fortnight (-) Closing Balance (a) Part II Other Approved Securities Opening Balance Addition during the fortnight (+) Deduction during the fortnight (-) Closing balance (b) Total (a+b) 70 Annex – VII (As mentioned in this MD) Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) & Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) (Appendix - II) Monthly statement showing the daily position of maintenance of liquid assets under Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As applicable to Co-operative Societies) during the month of __________ [Applicable to all Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks (Scheduled and Non- Scheduled)] [Vide paragraph …] Name of the Bank : (Rupees rounded off to the nearest Thousand) Amount of Liquid Assets Date Required to be Actually Deficit Surplus Remarks maintained maintained 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 71 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Signature of CEO : Name : Designation : NB : Where there is a public holiday under Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881), figures in respect of such day should relate to the preceding working day. -------------------------------------- 72 Annex – VIII Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) & Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) Register showing the daily position of cash reserve and liquid assets maintained under Sections 18 and 24 respectively of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As applicable to Co-operative Societies) (For Primary Co-operative Banks) [Vide paragraph …] (Rounded off to the nearest Thousand) Month and Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Part - A I. Liabilities in India £$ to the banking system

(a) Demand liabilities (i) Total of credit balances in current accounts maintained with the Co- operative Bank by the State Bank of India and corresponding new banks (ii) Total of other demand liabilities to the banking system (b) Time liabilities to the banking system Total of I 73 II. Liabilities in India £, X to others (a) Demand liabilities (b) Time liabilities Total of II III. Assets in India with the banking system (a) Total of credit balances % in current accounts maintained with State Bank of India and corresponding new banks. (b) Total of other assets with the banking system, viz., (i) balances in all accounts other than those included in item III (a), (ii) money at call and short notice, (iii) advances, and (iv) any other assets. IV. Total (net) demand and time liabilities for the purposes of Sections 18 and 24 of the Act = (I-III) + II, if (I-III) is a plus figure, OR II only, if (I-III) is a minus figure V. Cash in hand VI. Balances in current accounts with (a) Reserve Bank of India ++ (b) State Co- operative Bank of the State concerned *+% 74 (c) District Central Co-operative Bank of the district concerned *% Total of VI VII. Balances of all other types with

(a) State Co- operative Bank of the State concerned *+% (b) District Central Co-operative Bank of the district concerned *+% Total of VII VIII. Net balance in current accounts, i.e., excess of III(a) over I(a)(i) Part-B Compliance with Section 18 (Not applicable to Scheduled State Co- operative Banks) IX. 3 per cent of IV as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight X. Cash reserve actually maintained = V + VI + VIII Part-C Compliance with Section 24: (Not applicable to scheduled State Co- operative Banks) 75 XI. 25 per cent (or a higher specified percentage) of IV as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight XII. Assets actually maintained (a) Cash and other balances maintained in India X-IX + VII (b) Gold ££ (c) Unencumbered approved securities $$ Total of XII Part-D Compliance with Section 24: (Applicable to Scheduled / State Co-operative Banks) XIII 25 per cent (or a higher specified percentage) of IV as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight XIV Assets actually maintained (a) Cash in hand

(b) Balance maintained with the Reserve Bank of India in excess of the balance required to be maintained under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934[i.e., VI(a)] 76 (c) Net balance in current accounts (i.e., VIII) (d) Gold ££ (e) Unencumbered approved securities $$ Total of XIV 77 Annex-IX Explanations for Compilation of the figures under various heads of the Register showing Daily Position of Cash Reserve and Liquid Assets maintained by Primary Co-operative Banks 1. "Liabilities in India" shall not include -

(i) the paid-up capital or reserves or, any credit balance in the profit and loss account of the co-operative bank; (ii) any advances taken by a primary co-operative bank from the State Cooperative Bank of the State concerned or the District central co- operative bank of the district concerned; (iii) any advance taken from a State Government, Reserve Bank, Industrial Development Bank of India, Export-Import Bank of India, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, or from the National Co-op. Development Corporation established under Section 3 of the National Cooperative Development Corporation Act, 1962. (iv) amount of any advance or other credit arrangement drawn and availed of by a co-operative bank against approved securities; (v) in the case of any co-op. bank which has granted an advance against any balance maintained with it, such balance to the extent of the amount outstanding in respect of such advance. 2. The expression 'Banking System' shall comprise the following banks and financial institutions, viz. (i) State Bank of India; (ii) Corresponding new banks or IDBI Bank Ltd. (iii) Regional Rural banks; (iv) Banking Companies;

(v) Other financial institutions, if any, notified by the Central Government in this behalf under clause (d) of the Explanation to subsection (1) of Section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies). 3. Time liabilities include fixed deposits, cash certificates, cumulative and recurring deposits, time liabilities portion of savings bank deposits,staff 78 security deposits, margins hold against letters of credit if not payable on demand and fixed deposits held as security for advances subject to item l(v) above. 4. Fixed deposits will include (i) employees' provident fund deposits, (ii) staff security deposits, (iii) recurring deposits, (iv) cash certificates, (v) call deposits requiring notice period of more than 14 days, (vi) provident deposits, (vii) other miscellaneous deposits like earnest money deposits of contractors etc.

5. Demand liabilities include current deposits, demand liabilities portion of savings bank deposits, margins held, against letters of credit / guarantees, balances in overdues fixed deposits, cash certificates and cumulative, / recurring deposits, outstanding telegraphic and mail transfers, demand drafts, unclaimed deposits, credit balances in the cash credit accounts and deposits held as security for advances which are payable on demand. 6. Current deposits will include (i) call deposit which require a notice period of 14 days or less (ii) credit balance in cash credit account, (iii) fixed deposits matured but not withdrawn etc. 7. "Net balance in current accounts" shall, in relation to a co-op. bank, mean the excess, if any, of the aggregate of the credit balances in current account maintained by that co-op. bank with the State Bank of India or a corresponding new bank or IDBI Bank Ltd. over the aggregate of the credit balances in current accounts held by the said banks with such co-op bank;

8. For the purpose of computation of liabilities, the aggregate of the liabilities of a co-op. bank to the State Bank of India, a corresponding new bank or IDBI Bank Ltd.,a Regional Rural bank, a banking company or any other financial institution notified by the Central Government in this behalf shall be reduced by the aggregate of the liabilities of all such banks and institutions to the co- op. bank; 9. Other demand and time liabilities include interest accrued on deposits, bills payable, unpaid dividends and suspense account balances representing amounts due to other banks or public. 10. Money at call and short notice obtained from outside the 'Banking System' (say from Life Insurance Corporation, Unit Trust of India, etc.) should be shown against Item No. II. 11. If a bank cannot segregate from the total of 'other demand liabilities' and 'time liabilities', the liabilities to the 'Banking System', the entire 'other demand 79 liabilities' and 'time liabilities' may be shown against Item viz., Liabilities in India to others – (i) demand liabilities, and (ii) time liabilities as the case may be.

12. Only demand and time borrowings other than those excluded under clause (a) (ii) and (iii) of the explanation to Section 18(l) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) should be shown against this item. 13. 'Other demand liabilities' and 'other time liabilities ' as the case may be, will include deposits unclaimed for more than ten years, provisions in the nature of outside liabilities (such as provision for income tax and other taxes payable, audit fees payable, establishment charges payable etc.), interest payable, bonus payable, bills payable, dividend payable, share suspense, other suspense and sundry items (which are outside liabilities) etc. 14. In case the co-op. bank has taken an advance against any balance maintained with the State Co-operative Bank of the State concerned or with the district central cooperative bank of the district concerned, such balance to the extent to which it has been drawn against or availed of shall not be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 15. In computing the amount for the purpose the following shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India, namely;

(i) any cash or balances maintained in India by a co-operative bank, with itself or with the State Co-operative Bank of the State concerned, or in current account with the Reserve Bank or by way of net balance in current accounts, and, in the case of a primary co-operative bank, also any balances maintained with the district central co- operative bank of the district concerned, in excess of the aggregate of the cash or balances required to be maintained under Section 18; (ii) any net balance in current account. 16. Assets with the 'Banking System' in India comprise; (i) Balances with the 'Banking System' in current accounts (a) with public sector banks and (b) with all other banks and notified financial institutions; 80 (ii) Balances with banks and notified financial institutions, in all other accounts, (iii) Funds made available to the 'Banking System' by way of loans or deposits repayable at call or short notice of a fortnight or less; (iv) Loans, other than 'Money at call and short notice' made available to the 'banking system'; and

(v) Any other amounts due from the 'Banking System' which cannot be classified under any of the above items, for example in the case of inter-bank remittance facility scheme, as on date, the total amount held by a bank with other banks (in transit or other account) would be shown here as such sums cannot be constructed as 'balances' or 'call money' or 'advances'. (vi) In this context, it may be clarified, that if a bank has lodged securities with another bank for borrowal arrangements, then such securities or the unencumbered position of the same should not be shown by the borrowing bank as 'assets' with 'Banking System'. Similarly, the bank which has received the securities should not show them as 'other liabilities', to the 'Banking System'. (vii) Currency and rupee notes and coins held as till money should be shown as cash in India (i.e. cash in hand). However, currencies of foreign countries held with a bank should not be included. 17. Cash must not include balances with other banks or any item other than bank / currency notes, rupee coin (including one rupee notes) and subsidiary coins current on the date of the posting of the register.

18. Unencumbered approved securities to be valued on the basis of the method of valuation determined by the Reserve Bank (at present being valued at a price not exceeding current market price). 19. "unencumbered approved securities" of a co-op. bank shall include its approved securities lodged with another institution for an advance or any other credit arrangement to the extent to which such securities have not been drawn against or availed of. 20. Gold to be valued at a price not exceeding the current market price. 81 Annex-X Computation of Demand and Time Liabilities for CRR & SLR Definition of various terms used in Form-B & Form-I prescribed for Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks 1. 'Banking System' comprises of – (i) State Bank of India (ii) Nationalised Banks (iii) Regional Rural Banks (iv) Banking Companies as defined in clause (c) of Section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. These include – • Private Sector Banks • Foreign Banks Note: Foreign banks having no branch in India are not part of 'banking system'.

(v) Co-operative banks as defined in clause (cci) of Section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (applicable to Scheduled UCBs for computation of DTL for CRR) Note: Co-operative Land Mortgage / Development Banks are not part of ‘banking system’ (vi) Any other financial institution 'notified' by the Central Government in this behalf. 2. 'Banking System' does not include the following - (i) EXIM Bank (ii) NABARD (iii) SIDBI (iv) IFCI (v) IIBI 3. Net Liabilities While computing liabilities for the purpose of CRR and SLR, the net liabilities of the bank to other banks in India in the 'banking system' shall be reckoned, i.e., assets in India with other banks in the 'banking system' will be reduced from total liabilities to the 'banking system'. 82 4. Liabilities to the 'Banking System' include - (i) Deposits of the banks. (ii) Borrowings from Banks (Call Money / Notice deposits). (iii) Other miscellaneous items of liabilities to the Banks like Participation Certificates issued to banks, interest accrued on bank deposits, etc. 5. Classification of Liabilities to the 'Banking System'

(i) Liabilities of the bank to the 'banking system' are classified into two broad categories viz. 'Demand Liabilities' and 'Time Liabilities'. (ii) 'Demand Liabilities' to the 'banking system' are further classified as under: (a) Balances in current accounts of – • SBI • Nationalised Banks (b) Other demand liabilities comprising of – 1. Balances in current accounts of – • RRB • Banking Companies i.e. Private Sector Banks and Foreign Banks • Co-operative Banks (applicable to Scheduled UCBs for computation of DTL for CRR) • Other 'Notified' financial institutions 2. Balances of overdue time deposits of above named banks. 3. Participation Certificates payable on demand issued to banks. 4. Interest accrued on deposits of banks (RRBs).* 5. Call Money Borrowings from the banks 6. Within the definition of 'banking system' (iii) Time liabilities to the 'banking system' include – (a) All types of time deposits from the banks (b) Certificates of deposits from the banks 83 (c) Participation Certificates issued to banks which are not payable on demand

(d) Interest accrued on time deposits / CDs of banks * Within the definition of 'banking system' * If it is not possible to classify / segregate this amount from interest accrued on deposits, the aggregate interest accrued may be shown under 'Other Demand and Time Liabilities'. 6. Assets with the 'Banking System' (i) Balances with 'banking system' in current accounts (ii) Balances with the banks and notified financial institutions in other accounts. (iii) Money at call and short notice upto 14 days lent to banks and notified financial institutions, within the banking system (iv) Loans other than money at call and short notice made available to the 'banking system'. (v) Any other amounts due from the 'banking system', like amount held by the bank with other banks (in transit or other accounts) under inter-bank remittance facility, etc. 7. Classification of lending to and borrowing from FIs (i) Lending by the bank to the following financial institutions in the term money market cannot be reckoned as assets with the 'Banking System'. Hence, these borrowings cannot be netted against the liabilities towards the 'Banking System'. • EXIM Bank • NABARD • SIDBI • IFCI

• IIBI (ii) The borrowing of the bank other than refinance from these financial institutions should form part of liabilities to others and therefore, form part of net demand and time liabilities for the purpose of reserve requirements. 84 8. Classification of Certain items under Liabilities (i) Inter-Branch Accounts (a) Net balance in inter-branch account, when in credit, is to be shown under 'Other Liabilities and Provisions' which is included in total Demand and Time Liabilities for CRR and SLR purpose.

(b) After 27.07.98, the bank should segregate the credit entries outstanding for more than five years in inter-branch account as 'Blocked Account' and show it under 'Others' under 'Other Liabilities and Provisions'. Thereafter, while arriving at net amount of inter- branch transactions for inclusion under 'Other Liabilities and Provisions' if in credit, or 'Other Assets' if in debit, the aggregate amount of 'Blocked Account' should be excluded and only the amount representing the remaining credit entries should be netted against debit entries. Thus, the balance in the 'Blocked Account' will be reckoned for the purpose of maintenance of CRR and SLR, even though the net of inter-branch entries is a debit balance. (ii) Margin Money on Bills Discounted / Purchased The bank should follow uniform procedure in treating margin money on bills purchased/discounted as outside liabilities and should include it in other demand and time liabilities for the purpose of maintenance of reserve requirements. (iii) Interest Accrued on Deposits

(a) The interest accrued on all deposit accounts (such as, savings, fixed, recurring, cash certificates, reinvestment plans, etc.), by whatever name called, should be treated by the bank as its liability for the purpose of maintaining CRR and SLR irrespective of whether the accrued interest has become actually payable or is not payable till due dates for repayment of deposits. (b) The interest accrued on deposits should be classified under 'Other Demand and Time Liabilities' 85

