RBI/2016-17/02 FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.5/02.01.001/2016-17 July 1, 2016 The Chairmen and Managing Directors SLBC Convenor Banks/Lead Banks Dear Sir/Madam MASTER CIRCULAR – Lead Bank Scheme The Reserve Bank of India has issued guidelines on Lead Bank Scheme from time to time. This Master Circular consolidates the relevant guidelines issued by Reserve Bank of India on Lead Bank Scheme up to June 30, 2016 as listed in the Appendix. 2. This Master Circular has been placed on the RBI website http://www.rbi.org.in Yours faithfully, (Jose J. Kattoor) Chief General Manager Encl: As above 2 Structure 1 Introduction 2 Fora under Lead Bank Scheme 2.1 Block Level Bankers’ Committee 2.2 District Consultative Committee (DCC) 2.2.1 Constitution of DCC 2.2.2 Conduct of DCC Meetings 2.2.3 Agenda for DCC Meetings 2.2.4 Role of LDMs 2.2.5 Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance Redressal 2.2.6 District Level Review Committee (DLRC) Meetings 2.2.7 DCC/DLRC meetings – Annual Calendar of Meetings

2.3 State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) 2.3.1 Constitution of SLBC 2.3.2 Conduct of SLBC Meetings 2.3.3 Agenda for SLBC Meetings 2.3.4 Banking Penetration 2.3.5 SLBC – Yearly Calendar of Meetings 2.3.6 SLBC Website – Standardization of information/data 2.3.7 Liaison with State Government 2.3.8 Capacity Building/Training/Sensitization Programmes 3 Implementation of Lead Bank Scheme 3.1 Preparation of credit plans 3.2 Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs) 3.3 Monitoring the performance of credit plans – MIS 4 Assignment of Lead Bank Responsibility 5 Roadmap for provision of banking services in unbanked villages 5.1 Roadmap for opening brick and mortar branches in villages with population more than 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled commercial bank 6 Credit Deposit Ratio 6.1 CD ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas 6.2 Implementation of the recommendations of Expert Group on CD ratio 7 Direct Benefit Transfer

7.1 Seeding of Aadhaar in bank account – Clarification 8 Service Area Approach 8.1 Dispensing with No Due Certificate 3 1. Introduction (i) The genesis of Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) can be traced to the Study Group headed by Prof. D. R. Gadgil (Gadgil Study Group) on the organizational framework for implementation of the social objectives, which submitted its report in October

1969. The Study Group drew attention to the fact that commercial banks did not have adequate presence in rural areas and also lacked the required rural orientation. The Study Group, therefore, recommended the adoption of an 'Area Approach' to evolve plans and programmes for the development of an adequate banking and credit structure in the rural areas. (ii) A Committee of Bankers on Branch Expansion Programme of public sector banks appointed by Reserve Bank of India under the Chairmanship of Shri F. K. F. Nariman (Nariman Committee) endorsed the idea of area approach in its report (November 1969) recommending that in order to enable the public sector banks to discharge their social responsibilities, each bank should concentrate on certain districts where it should act as a 'Lead Bank'. (iii) Pursuant to the above recommendations, the Lead Bank Scheme was introduced by Reserve Bank of India in December 1969. The Scheme aims at coordinating the activities of banks and other developmental agencies through various fora in order to achieve the objective of enhancing the flow of bank finance to priority sector and other sectors and to promote banks' role in overall development of the rural sector. For coordinating the activities in the district, a particular bank is assigned the lead bank responsibility of the district. The lead bank is expected to assume leadership role for coordinating the efforts of the credit institutions and Government. (iv) In view of the several changes that had taken place in the financial sector, the Lead Bank Scheme was last reviewed by the High Level Committee headed by Smt Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India in 2009.

(v) The High Level Committee held wide ranging discussions with various stakeholders viz. State Governments, banks, development institutions, academicians, NGOs, MIFIs etc. and noted that the Scheme has been useful in achieving its original objectives of improvement in branch expansion, deposit mobilisation and lending to the priority sectors, especially in rural/semi urban areas. 4 There was overwhelming consensus that the Scheme needs to continue. Based on the recommendations of the Committee, guidelines were issued to SLBC Convenor banks and lead banks for implementation. 2. Fora under Lead Bank Scheme

2.1 Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC) BLBC is a forum for achieving coordination between credit institutions on one hand and field level development agencies on the other. The forum prepares and reviews implementation of Block Credit Plan and also resolves operational problems in implementation of the credit programmes of banks. Lead District Manager of the district is the Chairman of the Block Level Bankers’ Committee. All the banks operating in the block including the district central co-operative banks and RRB, Block Development Officer, technical officers in the block, such as extension officers for agriculture, industries and co-operatives are members of the Committee. BLBC meetings are held at quarterly intervals. The LDO of RBI and the DDM of NABARD selectively attend the meetings of the BLBCs. The representatives of Panchayat Samitis are also invited to attend the meetings at half yearly intervals so as to share their knowledge and experience on rural development in the credit planning exercise.

2.2 District Consultative Committee (DCC) 2.2.1 Constitution of DCC DCCs were constituted in the early seventies as a common forum at district level for bankers as well as Government agencies/departments towards coordination of activities in implementing various developmental activities under the scheme. The District Collector is the Chairman of the DCC meetings. Reserve Bank of India, NABARD, all the commercial banks in the district, co-operative banks including District Central Cooperative Bank (DCCB), RRBs, various State Government departments and allied agencies are the members of the DCC. The Lead District Officer (LDO) represents the Reserve Bank as a member of the DCC. The Lead District Manager convenes the DCC meetings. The Director of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises Development Institutes (MSME-DI) is an invitee in districts where MSME clusters are located to discuss issues concerning MSMEs. 5

2.2.2 Conduct of DCC Meetings i) DCC meeting should be convened by the lead banks at quarterly intervals. ii) At the DCC level, sub-committees as appropriate may be set up to work intensively on specific issues and submit reports to the DCC for its consideration. iii) DCC should give adequate feedback to the SLBC on various issues that needs to be discussed on a wider platform, so that these receive adequate attention at the State Level.

2.2.3 Agenda for DCC Meetings While all lead banks are expected to address the problems particular to the concerned districts, some of the important areas which are common to all districts which the lead banks should invariably discuss in the fora are as under: i) Monitoring mechanism to periodically assess and evaluate the progress made in achieving the road map to provide banking services within the prescribed time frame. The progress under financial inclusion plan (FIP) should also be reviewed in DCC meetings. ii) The specific issues inhibiting and enabling IT enabled financial inclusion iii) Issues to facilitate 'enablers' and remove/minimise 'impeders' for banking development for inclusive growth iv) Monitoring initiatives for providing 'Credit Plus' activities by banks and State Governments such as setting up of Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) and RSETI type Training Institutes for providing skills and capacity building to manage businesses. v) Scaling up financial literacy efforts to achieve financial inclusion. vi) Review of performance of banks under District Credit Plan (DCP) vii) Flow of credit to priority sector and weaker sections of the society viii) Assistance under Government sponsored schemes ix) Grant of educational loans x) Progress under SHG - bank linkage xi) SME financing & bottlenecks thereof, if any xii) Timely submission of data by banks xiii) Review of relief measures (in case of natural calamities wherever applicable) The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. The lead banks may include any other agenda item considered necessary. 6

2.2.4 Role of LDMs As the effectiveness of the Lead Bank Scheme depends on the dynamism of the District Collectors and the Lead District Managers (LDMs), with supportive role of the Regional/Zonal Office, the office of LDM should be sufficiently strengthened with appropriate infrastructural support being the focal point for successful implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme. Officers of appropriate level and attitude should be posted as LDMs. Apart from the usual role of LDMs like convening meetings of the DCC/DLRC and periodical meetings of DDM/LDO/ Government officials for resolving outstanding issues etc., the new functions envisaged for LDMs include the following: i) Drawing up and monitoring the road map for banking penetration ii) Monitoring implementation of district credit plan iii) Associate with the setting up of Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs), RSETIs by banks iv) Associate with organizing financial literacy camps by FLCs and rural branches of banks. v) Holding annual sensitisation workshops for banks and Government officials with participation by NGOs/Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) vi) Arranging for quarterly awareness and feedback public meetings, grievance redressal etc.

2.2.5 Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance Redressal The Lead District Manager should convene a quarterly public meeting at various locations in the district in coordination with the LDO of Reserve Bank, banks having presence in the area and other stakeholders to generate awareness of the various banking policies and regulations relating to the common person, obtain feedback from the public and provide grievance redressal to the extent possible at such meetings or facilitate approaching the appropriate machinery for such redressal.

2.2.6 District Level Review Committee (DLRC) Meetings DLRC meetings are Chaired by the District Collector and attended by members of the District Consultative Committee (DCC). Besides above, public representatives i.e. Local MPs/MLAs/ Zilla Parishad Chiefs are also invited to these meetings. The DLRC meetings should be convened by the lead banks atleast once in a quarter. In DLRC meetings review of the programmes under Lead Bank Scheme is carried out 7 by getting feedback to know the pace and quality of the implementation of various programmes in the district. Hence association of non-officials is considered useful. Lead banks are required to ensure the presence of public representatives in DLRC meetings as far as possible. Therefore, Lead banks should fix the date of DLRC meetings with due regard to the convenience of the representatives of the public i.e. MPs/MLAs etc. and invite and involve them in all functions conducted by the banks in the districts, such as opening of new branches, distribution of Kisan Credit Cards, SHG credit linkage programmes etc. Responses to queries from public representatives need to be accorded highest priority and attended to promptly. The follow up of DLRC’s decisions is required to be discussed in the DCC meetings.

2.2.7 DCC/DLRC meetings- Annual Calendar of Meetings i) DCC and DLRC are the important coordinating fora among commercial banks, Government agencies and others at district level to review and find solutions to the problems hindering the developmental activities. Therefore, it is necessary that all the members participate and deliberate in the above meetings. On a review of the DCC/DLRC meetings, it was observed that late receipt/non-receipt of intimation of the date of meetings, clash of dates with other events, commonality of dates etc. hinder participation of members in these meetings, thus undermining the prime objective of conducting the above meetings. ii) Lead banks have, therefore, been advised to prepare annual schedule of DCC and DLRC meetings on Calendar year basis for all districts in consultation with the Chairperson of the meetings, lead district officer of RBI and Public Representatives in case of DLRC. This yearly Calendar should be prepared in the beginning of each year and circulated to all members as advance intimation for blocking future dates to attend the DCC and DLRC meetings and the meetings should be conducted as per the calendar. While preparing the Calendar, it should be seen that DCC and DLRC meetings are not held simultaneously.

2.3.1 Constitution of SLBC i) The State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) has been constituted in April 1977, as an apex inter-institutional forum to create adequate coordination machinery in all States, on a uniform basis for development of the State. SLBC is Chaired by the 8 Chairman & Managing Director (CMD) of the convenor bank/Executive Director of the convenor bank. It comprises representatives of commercial banks, RRBs, State Cooperative Banks, RBI, NABARD, heads of Government departments including representatives from National Commission for Scheduled Castes/Tribes, National Horticulture Board, Khadi & Village Industries Commission etc. and representatives of financial institutions operating in a State, who come together and sort out coordination problems at the policy implementation level. Representatives of various organizations from different sectors of the economy like retail traders, exporters and farmers’ union etc. are special invitees in SLBC meetings for discussing their specific problems, if any. The SLBC meetings are held on quarterly basis. The responsibility of convening the meetings of the SLBC would be that of the SLBC convenor bank of the State. ii) Recognising that SLBCs, primarily as a committee of bankers at State level play an important role in the development of the State, illustrative guidelines on the conduct of State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) meetings have been issued.

2.3.2 Conduct of SLBC Meetings i) The SLBC meetings are required to be held regularly at quarterly intervals. SLBC is chaired by the Chairman & Managing Director (CMD) of the convenor bank/Executive Director of the convenor bank and co-chaired by Additional Chief Secretary or Development Commissioner of the State concerned. High Level of participation in SLBC/UTLBC meetings ensure an effective and desired outcome with meaningful discussion on issues of public policy of both the Government of India and Reserve Bank of India. ii) The Chief Minister/Finance Minister and senior level officers of the State/RBI (of the rank of Deputy Governor / Executive Director) may be invited to attend the SLBC meetings. Further, the State Chief Ministers are encouraged to attend at least one SLBC meeting in a year. iii) In view of the large membership of the SLBC, it would be desirable for the SLBC to constitute Steering Sub Committee/Sub-Committees for specific tasks like agriculture, micro, small/medium industries/enterprises, handloom finance, export promotion and financial inclusion etc. The sub committees may examine the specific issues in-depth and devise solutions/recommendations for adoption by the full 9 committee. It is expected to meet more frequently than the SLBC. The composition of the sub-committee and subjects/ specific issues impeding/enabling financial inclusion to be deliberated upon, may vary from State to State depending on the specific problems/issues faced by the States. iv) The secretariat/offices of SLBC should be sufficiently strengthened to enable the SLBC convenor bank to effectively discharge its functions. v) The various fora at lower levels may give adequate feedback to the SLBC on issues that need to be discussed on a wider platform. vi) Several institutions and academicians are engaged in research and studies etc. that have implications for sustainable development in agriculture and MSME sector. Engaging with such research institutions and academicians would be useful in bringing in new ideas for furthering the objectives of the Lead Bank Scheme. The SLBCs may, therefore, identify such academicians and researchers and invite them as 'special invitees' to attend SLBC meetings occasionally both for adding value to the discussion and also associate them with studies for product formulation appropriate to the State. Other 'special invitees' may be invited to attend SLBC meetings depending on the agenda items/issues to be discussed in the meetings. vii) The activities of NGOs in facilitating and channeling credit to the low income households are expected to increase in the coming years. Several corporate houses are also engaged in corporate social responsibility activities for sustainable development. Bank's linkage with such NGOs/Corporate houses operating in the area to ensure that the NGOs/corporates provide the necessary 'credit plus' services can help leverage bank credit for inclusive growth. Success stories could be presented in SLBC meetings to serve as models that could be replicated.

2.3.3 Agenda for SLBC Meetings While all SLBCs are expected to address the problems particular to the concerned states, some of the important areas which are common to all States which the SLBCs should invariably discuss in the fora are as under: i) Financial inclusion - monitoring mechanism to periodically assess and evaluate the progress made in achieving the road map to provide banking services within the time frame prescribed. The progress under FIP should also be reviewed in SLBC meetings. 10 ii) The specific issues inhibiting and enabling IT enabled financial inclusion. iii) Issues to facilitate 'enablers' and remove/minimise 'impeders' for banking development for inclusive growth iv) Monitoring initiatives for providing 'Credit Plus' activities by banks and State Governments such as setting up of Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) and RSETI type training institutes for providing skills and capacity building to manage businesses v) Scaling up financial literacy efforts to achieve financial inclusion. vi) Review of performance of banks under Annual Credit Plan (ACP) of the State vii) Regional imbalances in deployment of credit to various sectors of the economy viii) Credit - Deposit Ratio of the State ix) Flow of credit to priority sector and weaker sections of the society x) Assistance under Government sponsored schemes xi) Grant of educational loans xii) Progress under SHG - bank linkage xiii) Discuss the problems faced by MSME sector xiv) Steps taken for improving land record and recovery mechanism xv) Timely submission of data by banks xvi) Review of relief measures (in case of natural calamities wherever applicable) and xvii) Issues remaining unresolved at the DCC/DLRC meetings The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. The SLBC convenor banks may include any other agenda item considered necessary.

2.3.4 Banking Penetration i) Over the years, the focus of Lead Bank Scheme has shifted to inclusive growth and financial inclusion. The use of Information Technology (IT) and intermediaries has enabled banks to increase outreach, scale and depth of banking services at affordable cost. ii) SLBC Convenor banks / lead banks are advised to focus attention on the need for achieving 100% financial inclusion through penetration of banking services in the rural areas. Such banking services may not necessarily be extended through a brick 11 and mortar branch but can be provided through any of the various forms of ICT- based models, including through BCs. However, ICT connectivity should not be an excuse for not pursuing financial inclusion by commercial banks/RRBs. iii) SLBC convenor banks should take up with the State Governments impeders such as issues of road/digital connectivity, conducive law and order situation, uninterrupted power supply and adequate security etc. for ensuring banking expansion at all centres where penetration by the formal banking system is required. However, these impeders should not inhibit the scaling up of financial inclusion initiatives.

2.3.5 SLBC - Yearly Calendar of Meetings i) To improve the effectiveness and streamlining the functioning of SLBC/UTLBC meetings, SLBC convernor banks have been advised to prepare a yearly calendar of programme (calendar year basis) in the beginning of the year itself, for conducting the meetings. The calendar of programme should clearly specify the cut off dates for data submission to SLBC and acceptance thereof by SLBC convenor. This yearly calendar should be circulated to all the concerned as an advance intimation for blocking of future dates of senior functionaries of various agencies like Central Government, State Governments, banks and RBI, etc. The SLBC/UTLBC meetings should be conducted as per the calendar under all circumstances. The agenda should also be circulated in advance without waiting for the data from defaulting banks. The matter should, however, be taken up with the defaulting banks in the SLBC meeting. In addition, SLBC convernor bank should write a letter in this regard to the controlling office of the defaulting banks under advice to Regional Office of RBI. SLBC convenor bank will, however, continue to follow-up with banks for timely data submission. Further, in case the Chief Minister, Finance Minister or other very senior functionaries are not able to attend the SLBC on some very rare occasion, then if so desired by them, a special SLBC meeting can be held. Following broad guidelines should be used for preparation of the calendar of programmes: 12 Activity To be completed by (Date) Preparation of calendar of SLBC/UTLBC 15th January every year meetings and intimation to all the concerned of the cut-off dates for submission of data and dates of meetings as per the dateline given below. Reminder regarding the exact date of meeting 15 days before end of the and submission of data by banks to SLBC quarter Dead line for receipt of information/data by 15 days from the end of the SLBC convenor bank quarter Distribution of agenda cum background papers 20 days from the end of the quarter Holding of the meeting Within 45 days from the end of the quarter Forwarding the minutes of the meeting to all Within 10 days from holding the stakeholders meeting Follow-up of the action points emerged from the To be completed within 30 days meeting of forwarding the minutes (for review in the next meeting) ii) The objective of preparing calendar of meetings in the beginning of the year is to ensure adequate notice of these meetings and timely compilation and dispatch of agenda papers to all stake holders. It also ensures clear cut guidelines for submission of data to SLBC convenors by participating banks & Government Departments. It is expected to save precious time of SLBC convenors otherwise spent in taking dates from various senior functionaries attending these SLBC meetings. iii) SLBC convenor banks need to appreciate the advantages of ensuring adherence to the yearly calendars. SLBC convenor banks have therefore been advised to give wide publicity to the annual calendar at the beginning of the year and ensure that dates of senior functionaries expected to attend the meetings are blocked for all meetings by their offices. In case, despite blocking dates, if for some reason, the senior functionary is not able to attend the meeting, the meeting should be held as planned in the calendar. More importantly, the data for review in these meetings should be received as per deadlines set in the calendar and those who do not submit the data in time should be asked to explain the reasons for delay in sending the data that may be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Under no circumstances preparation of agenda should be delayed beyond stipulated dates as per calendar. 13

2.3.6 SLBC Website – Standardisation of information /data SLBC Convenor banks are required to maintain the SLBC websites where all instructions pertaining to LBS and Government Sponsored Schemes are made available and are accessible to the common man desiring any information relating to the conduct of meetings or State wise data/Bank wise performance. In order to standardize the information and data that is to be made available on SLBC website, an indicative list of the information & data is given in the Annex II. SLBCs should arrange to place the prescribed minimum information on the websites of SLBCs of their bank and keep it updated regularly, at least on quarterly basis. Banks may note that the list is only an indicative list and SLBCs are free to put any additional information considered relevant for the State.

2.3.7 Liaison with State Government SLBC Convenor banks are expected to co-ordinate the activities of all banks in the State, discuss with the State Government officials the operational problems in lending, extending necessary support for banking development and to achieve the objective of financial inclusion.

2.3.8 Capacity Building/Training/Sensitization Programmes i) There is a need for sensitising the District Collectors and CEOs of Zilla Parishads on banks and banking in general as also on the specific scope and role of the Lead Bank Scheme. In each State, a full day sensitisation workshop may be convened by the SLBC Convenor bank every year preferably in April/May. Such sensitisation should form part of the probationary training of such officers. Further, as soon as they are posted in a district, the SLBC may arrange for exposure visits for the District Collectors to the SLBC Convenor’s office for sensitisation and understanding of the Lead Bank Scheme. ii) Staff at the operational level of banks and government agencies associated with implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme need to be aware of the latest developments and emerging opportunities. There is need for staff sensitisation/ training/seminars, etc. at periodic intervals on an ongoing basis 14

3. Implementation of Lead Bank Scheme 3.1 Preparation of credit plans Planning plays an important role in the implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme and a bottom-up approach is adopted to map the existing potential for development. Under LBS, planning starts with identifying block wise/activity wise potential estimated for various sectors.

3.2 Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs) i) Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs) are a step towards decentralized credit planning with the basic objective of mapping the existing potential for development through bank credit. PLPs take into account the long term physical potential, availability of infrastructure support, marketing facilities, and policies/programmes of Government etc. ii) A pre-PLP meeting is convened by LDM during June every year to be attended by the banks, Government agencies, etc., to reflect their views and concerns regarding credit potential (sector/activity-wise) and deliberate on major financial and socio- economic developments in the district in the last one year and priorities to be set out for inclusion in the PLP. DDM of NABARD will make a presentation in this meeting outlining the major requirements of information for preparing the PLP for the following year. The preparation of PLP for the next year is to be completed by August every year to enable the State Government to factor in the PLP projections. iii) The procedure for preparing the District Credit Plan is as follows: a) Controlling Offices of commercial banks and Head Office of RRB and DCCB/LDB will circulate the accepted block-wise/activity-wise potential to all their branches for preparing the Branch Credit Plans (BCP) by their respective branch managers. Banks should ensure that the exercise of preparation of branch/block plans is completed in time by all branches so that the Credit Plans become operational on time. b) A special Block Level Bankers' Committee (BLBC) meeting will be convened for each block where the Branch Credit Plans will be discussed and aggregated to form the Block Credit Plan. DDM and LDM will guide the BLBC 15 in finalizing the plan ensuring that the Block Credit Plan is in tune with the potentials identified activity-wise including in respect of Government sponsored programmes. c) All the Block Credit Plans of the district will be aggregated by LDM to form the District Credit Plan. This plan indicates an analytical assessment of the credit need of the district to be deployed by all the financial institutions operating in the district and total quantum of funds to be earmarked as credit by all the financial institutions for a new financial year. The Zonal/Controlling Offices of banks, while finalizing their business plans for the year, should take into account the commitments made in the DCP which should be ready well in time before the performance budgets are finalized. d) The District Credit Plan will be placed before the DCC by the Lead District Manager for final acceptance/approval. All the District Credit Plans would eventually be aggregated into State Level Credit Plan to be prepared by SLBC convenor bank and launched by 1st of April every year.

3.3 Monitoring the performance of credit plans The performance of the credit plans is reviewed in the various fora created under the lead bank scheme as shown below: At Block Level Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC) At District Level District Consultative Committee (DCC) & District Level Review Committee (DLRC) At State Level State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) Monitoring of LBS by RBI - Monitoring Information System (MIS) i) Data on Annual Credit Plan (ACP), is an important element to review the flow of credit in the State. ACP formats have been revised to align the same with the revised reporting guidelines on priority sector lending. Accordingly, the ACP is to be prepared considering the categories of priority sector that would include Agriculture, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Export Credit, Education, Housing, Social Infrastructure and Renewable Energy and Others. Further, agriculture has been 16 redefined to include (i) Farm Credit, (ii) Agriculture Infrastructure and (iii) Ancillary Activities. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises would include manufacturing and service sector under (i) Micro Enterprises, (ii) Small Enterprises and (iii) Medium Enterprises, Khadi and Village Industries Sector (KVI) and other finance to MSMEs. Thus, at present, the reporting statements for ACP target is LBS-MIS-I (Annex IV), statement for disbursement and outstanding LBS-MIS –II (Annex V) and ACP achievement vis-à-vis ACP target LBS-MIS-III (Annex VI). Lead banks/SLBC Convenor banks have been advised, to prepare the bank group wise statements of LBS-MIS –I, II and III as per prescribed formats starting from the financial year 2016- 17 and also place these statements for meaningful review in all DCC and SLBC meetings. ii) In order to maintain consistency and integrity of data with the all India data of scheduled commercial banks and meaningful review/analysis of data, the ACP and FIP data needs to be grouped separately for scheduled commercial banks and other banks like State cooperative banks & DCCBs etc. while presenting in the DCC/SLBC meetings and submitting to our regional offices. The data of scheduled commercial banks needs to be further grouped into public sector banks, private sector banks and Regional Rural Banks to know the bank group wise position.

4. Assignment of Lead Bank Responsibility i) Lead Bank Scheme is administered by the Reserve Bank of India since 1969. The assignment of lead bank responsibility to designated banks in every district is done by Reserve Bank of India following a detailed procedure formulated for this purpose. As on June 30, 2016, 25 public sector banks and one private sector bank have been assigned lead bank responsibility in 673 districts of the country. ii) State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)/Union Territory Level Bankers' Committee (UTLBC) as an apex level forum at State/Union Territory (UT) level coordinates the activities of the financial institutions and Government departments in the State/Union Territory under the Lead Bank Scheme. SLBC Convenorship is assigned to banks for this purpose. As on June 30, 2016, the SLBC/UTLBC convenorship of 29 States and 7 Union Territories has been assigned to 16 public 17 sector banks and one private sector bank. List of State wise SLBC Convenor banks and district wise lead banks is given in Annex I. iii) The Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) has been extended to the districts in the metropolitan areas thus bringing the entire country under the fold of the Lead Bank Scheme.

5. Roadmap for opening of banking outlets in unbanked villages i) A phase wise approach has been adopted to provide door step banking facilities in all the unbanked villages in the country. In November 2009, under Phase-I, guidelines for preparation of Roadmap for providing banking services in villages with population more than 2000 was issued. After successful completion of Phase-I by March 2012, a roadmap to provide banking services in unbanked villages with less than 2,000 population was rolled out in June 2012 ii) Keeping in view the ongoing implementation of PMJDY, SLBC Convenors banks and lead banks have been advised to complete the process of providing banking services in unbanked villages with population below 2000 (Phase II) by August 14, 2015 in line with the PMJDY instead of March 2016 prescribed earlier iii) Under the Roadmap for providing banking services in villages with population less than 2000, SLBC convenor banks are advised to monitor the progress of roadmap for covering all unbanked villages with population less than 2000 and ensure completion by the prescribed timeline of August 2015. The quarterly report on the progress made by banks under above roadmap (bank wise in each district) is required to be forwarded by SLBCs to the respective Regional Office of Reserve Bank as per the format prescribed at Annex III within 15 days from the close of the quarter.

5.1 Roadmap for opening brick and mortar branches in villages with population more than 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled commercial bank On a review of the roadmap to provide banking facilities in villages with population more than 2000 and in villages with population less than 2000, it has been observed that coverage of banking services in unbanked villages is skewed towards the BC model and the ratio of branches to BC is very low. For increasing banking 18 penetration and financial inclusion, brick and mortar branches are an integral component. Therefore, it has been decided to focus on villages with population above 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled commercial bank. This will also enable banks to provide quality financial services and timely support to BC outlets that would help in sustaining and strengthening the services provided through BCs and also ensure close supervision of BC operations. Accordingly, SLBC Convenor banks were advised to identify villages with population above 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled commercial bank in their State. The identified villages are to be allotted among scheduled commercial banks (including Regional Rural Banks) for opening of branches. The opening of bank branches under this Roadmap should be completed by March 31, 2017.

6. Credit Deposit Ratio 6.1 CD ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas Banks have been advised to achieve a credit deposit ratio of 60% in respect of their rural and semi-urban branches separately on an all-India basis. While it is not necessary that this ratio should be achieved separately branch-wise, district-wise or region-wise, the banks should nevertheless, ensure that wide disparity in the ratios between different States / Regions is avoided in order to minimise regional imbalance in credit deployment. The credit dispensation in certain districts is very low, as a result of various factors such as lack of necessary infra-structure, varying ability of different regions to absorb credit, etc. The banks may review the performance of their bank branches in such areas and take necessary steps to augment the credit flow. The lead banks may discuss the problem in all its aspects with the other financial institutions in the district and also in the DCC forums.

6.2 Implementation of the recommendations of Expert Group on CD Ratio i) An Expert Group was constituted by Government of India to go into the nature and magnitude of the problem of low credit deposit (CD) ratio across States / Regions and to suggest steps to overcome the problem. The Expert Group examined problems and causes of low CD ratio. As per the recommendations, the CD ratio of banks should be monitored at different levels on the basis of the following parameters – 19 Institution / Level Indicator Individual banks at Head Office Cu + RIDF State Level (SLBC) Cu + RIDF District Level Cs Where: Cu = Credit as per place of Utilization Cs = Credit as per place of Sanction RIDF = Total Resource support provided to States under RIDF Further, banks are advised that: • In the districts having CD ratio less than 40, Special Sub-Committees (SSCs) of DCC may be set up to monitor the CD ratio. • Districts having CD ratio between 40 and 60, will be monitored under the existing system by DCC, and • The district with CD ratio of less than 20 need to be treated on a special footing. ii) Special Sub- Committee (SSCs) of DCC should be set up in the districts having CD ratio less than 40, in order to monitor the CD ratio and to draw up Monitorable Action Plans (MAPs) to increase the CD ratio. The Lead District Manager is designated as the convenor of the SSC, which in addition to District co-ordinators of banks functioning in the area, will comprise of LDO of RBI, DDM of NABARD, District Planning Officer or a representative of the Collector duly empowered to take decisions on behalf of the district administration. The functions of the Special Sub-Committee are as under: • The Special Sub-Committee (SSCs) will draw up Monitorable Action Plans (MAPs) for improving the CD ratio in their districts on a self-set graduated basis. • For this purpose the SSC will hold a special meeting immediately after its constitution and on the basis of the various ground level parameters, set for itself a target for increasing the CD ratio initially for the current year. It will also, at the same meeting, set a definite time frame for the CDR beyond 60 in annual increments. • Consequent on the completion of this process, the target and time frame self set by the SSC will be placed before the DCC for approval. • Take up the plans for implementation and monitor the same assiduously once in two months. 20 • Report the progress to the DCC on quarterly basis and through them to the convenor of SLBC. • On the basis of the feedback received from the DCC regarding the progress in the implementation of the Monitorable Action Plans (MAPs), consolidated report will be prepared and tabled at all SLBC meetings for discussion / information. iii) As regards the districts with CD ratio less than 20, these are generally located in hilly, desert, inaccessible terrains and / or those dependent solely on the primary sector and/ or characterized by a breakdown of the law and order machinery. In such areas, conventional methods are not likely to work unless the banking system and the State Government come together in a specially meaningful way. iv) While the framework for implementation for raising the CD ratio in these districts will be the same as in the case of districts with CD ratio below 40 (i.e setting up of SSC etc.), the focus of attention and the level of efforts should be of a much higher scale. For this, • All such districts should first be placed in a special category. • Thereafter, the responsibility for increasing their CD ratio should be taken by banks and State Governments and the districts should be "adopted" by the District Administration and the lead bank jointly. • While banks would be responsible for credit disbursement, the State Government would be required to give an upfront commitment regarding its responsibilities for creation of identified rural infrastructure together with support in creating an enabling environment for banks to lend and to recover their dues. Given a collaborative framework as outlined above, the Group was of the view that meaningful increase in CD ratio is possible. • Progress in the special category districts will be monitored at the district level and reported to the corporate offices of the concerned banks. • CMDs of banks would give special attention to the CD ratio in such districts. 21

7. Direct Benefit Transfer Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) was rolled out by Government of India in selected districts since January 2013. SLBC Convenor banks were advised to co-ordinate with the authorities to implement DBT. Banks were advised to include the status of the roll-out of DBT as a regular agenda item for discussion in SLBC meetings as part of Financial Inclusion/Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) implementation. As a prerequisite to the implementation of the DBT, every eligible individual should have a bank account. Further, to make disbursements at the doorstep through the ICT- based BC model, banking outlets either through brick & mortar branches or the branchless mode is needed in all villages across the country. Hence, banks have been advised to: • take steps to complete account opening and seeding Aadhaar number in all the DBT districts. • closely monitor the progress in seeding of Aadhaar number in bank accounts of beneficiaries. • put in place a system to provide acknowledgement to the beneficiary of seeding request and also send confirmation of seeding of Aadhaar number. • form DBT Implementation Co-ordination Committee, along with State Government department concerned, at district level and review the seeding of Aadhaar number in bank accounts. • ensure that district and village wise names and other details of business correspondents (BCs) engaged/other arrangements made by the bank is displayed on the SLBC website. • set up a Complaint Grievance Redressal mechanism in each bank and nominate a Complaint Redressal Officer in each district, to redress the grievances related to ‘seeding of Aadhaar number in bank accounts'.

7.1 Seeding of Aadhaar in bank account – Clarification In view of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India’s interim orders dated August 11, 2015 and October 15, 2015 (W.P. (c) No. 494 of 2012) on usages of Aadhaar, it is hereby clarified that use of Aadhaar Card and seeding of bank accounts with Aadhaar numbers is purely voluntary and it is not mandatory. 22

8. Service Area Approach (SAA) i) The Service Area Approach (SAA) introduced in April 1989 for planned and orderly development of rural and semi-urban areas was applicable to all scheduled commercial banks including Regional Rural Banks. Under SAA, each bank branch in rural and semi-urban area was designated to serve an area of 15 to 25 villages and the branch was responsible for meeting the needs of bank credit of its service area. The primary objective of SAA was to increase productive lending and forge effective linkages between bank credit, production, productivity and increase in income levels. The SAA scheme was reviewed from time to time and appropriate changes were made in the scheme to make it more effective. ii) The Service Area Approach scheme was reviewed in December 2004 and it was decided to dispense with the restrictive provisions of the scheme while retaining the positive features of the SAA such as credit planning and monitoring of the credit purveyance. Accordingly, under SAA the allocation of villages among the rural and semi-urban branches of banks were made not applicable for lending except under Government Sponsored Schemes. Thus, while the commercial banks and RRBs are free to lend in any rural and semi-urban area, the borrowers have the choice of approaching any branch for their credit requirements.

8.1 Dispensing with No Due Certificate In order to ensure hassle free credit to all borrowers, especially in rural and semi- urban areas and keeping in view the technological developments and the different ways available with banks to avoid multiple financing, banks have been advised to dispense with obtaining ‘No Due Certificate’ from the individual borrowers (including SHGs & JLGs) in rural and semi-urban areas for all types of loans including loans under Government Sponsored Schemes, irrespective of the amount involved unless the Government Sponsored Scheme itself provides for obtention of ‘No Dues Certificate’. Banks are encouraged to use an alternative framework of due diligence as part of credit appraisal exercise other than the ‘No Due Certificate’ which could, among others, consist of one or more of the following: • Credit history check through credit information companies • Self-declaration or an affidavit from the borrower • CERSAI registration 23 • Peer monitoring • Information sharing among lenders • Information search (writing to other lenders with an auto deadline) 24 Annex I List of State-wise SLBC convenor banks and district-wise lead banks SR State / Union SLBC convener bank District District lead bank Territory 1 Andhra Andhra Bank 1. Anantapur Syndicate Bank Pradesh 2. Chittoor Indian Bank

3. East Godavari Andhra Bank 4. Guntur Andhra Bank 5. Kadapa Syndicate Bank 6. Krishna Indian Bank 7. Kurnool Syndicate Bank 8. Nellore Syndicate Bank 9. Prakasam Syndicate Bank 10. Srikakulam Andhra Bank 11. Visakhapatnam State Bank of India 12. Vizianagaram State Bank of India 13. West Godavari Andhra Bank 2 Arunachal State Bank of India 1. Anjaw State Bank of India Pradesh 2. Changlang State Bank of India 3. Dibang Valley State Bank of India 4. East Kameng State Bank of India 5. East Siang State Bank of India 6. Kurung Kumay State Bank of India 7. Lohit State Bank of India 8. Longding State Bank of India 9. Lower Dibang Valley State Bank of India 10. Lower Subansiri State Bank of India 11. Papum Pure State Bank of India 12. Tawang State Bank of India 13. Tirap State Bank of India 14. Upper Siang State Bank of India 15. Upper Subansiri State Bank of India 16. West Kameng State Bank of India 17. West Siang State Bank of India 3 Assam State Bank of India 1. Baksa State Bank of India

2. Barpeta UCO Bank 3. Bongaigaon State Bank of India 4. Cachar United Bank of India 5. Chirang State Bank of India 6. Darrang UCO Bank 7. Dhemaji United Bank of India 8. Dhubri UCO Bank 9. Dibrugarh United Bank of India 10. Goalpara UCO Bank 11. Golaghat United Bank of India 12. Hailakandi United Bank of India 25 13. Jorhat United Bank of India 14. Kamrup UCO Bank 15. Kamrup Metro UCO Bank 16. Karbi Anglong State Bank of India 17. Karimganj United Bank of India 18. Kokrajhar UCO Bank 19. Lakhimpur United Bank of India 20. Morigaon United Bank of India Assam State Bank of India 21. Nagaon United Bank of India 22. Nalbari UCO Bank 23. North Cachar Hills State Bank of India 24. Sivasagar United Bank of India 25. Sonitpur UCO Bank 26. Tinsukia United Bank of India 27. Udalguri State Bank of India 4 Bihar State Bank of India 1. Araria State Bank of India 2. Arwal Punjab National Bank 3. Aurangabad Punjab National Bank 4. Banka UCO Bank 5. Begusarai UCO Bank

6. Bhabua (Kaimur) Punjab National Bank 7. Bhagalpur UCO Bank 8. Bhojpur (Arrah) Punjab National Bank 9. Buxar Punjab National Bank 10. Darbhanga Central Bank of India 11. East Champaran Central Bank of India 12. Gaya Punjab National Bank 13. Gopalgunj Central Bank of India 14. Jamul State Bank of India 15. Jehanabad Punjab National Bank 16. Katihar Central Bank of India 17. Khagaria Union Bank of India 18. Kishanganj State Bank of India 19. Lakhisarai Punjab National Bank 20. Madhepura State Bank of India 21. Madhubani Central Bank of India 22. Monghyr UCO Bank 23. Muzaffarpur Central Bank of India 24. Nalanda Punjab National Bank 25. Nawada Punjab National Bank 26. Patna Punjab National Bank 27. Purnia (Purnea) State Bank of India 28. Rohtas (Sasaram) Punjab National Bank 29. Saharsa State Bank of India 30. Samastipur Union Bank of India 31. Saran Central Bank of India 32. Sheikhpura Canara Bank 26 33. Sheohar Bank of Baroda 34. Sitamarhi Bank of Baroda

35. Siwan Central Bank of India 36. Supaul State Bank of India 37. Vaishali Central Bank of India 38. West Champaran Central Bank of India 5 Chhattisgarh State Bank of India 1. Balod Dena Bank 2. Baloda bazar State Bank of India 3. Balrampur Central Bank of India 4. Bastar (Jagdalpur) State Bank of India 5. Bemetara State Bank of India 6. Bijapur State Bank of India 7. Bilaspur State Bank of India 8. Champa (Jangjir) State Bank of India 9. Dantewada State Bank of India 10. Dhamtari Dena Bank 11. Durg Dena Bank 12. Gariaband Dena Bank 13. Janjgir-Champa State Bank of India 14. Jashpur State Bank of India 15. Kanker State Bank of India 16. Kawardha State Bank of India 17. Korba State Bank of India 18. Koria Central Bank of India 19. Mahasamund Dena Bank 20. Mungeli State Bank of India 21. Narayanapur State Bank of India 22. Raigarh State Bank of India 23. Raipur Dena Bank 24. Rajnandgaon Dena Bank 25. Sarguja Central Bank of India 26. Sukma State Bank of India

27. Surajpur Central Bank of India 6 Goa State Bank of India 1. North Goa State Bank of India 2. South Goa State Bank of India 7 Gujarat Dena Bank 1. Ahmedabad Dena Bank 2. Amreli State Bank of India 3. Anand Bank of Baroda 4. Aravalli Dena Bank 5. Banaskantha Dena Bank 6. Baroda Bank of Baroda 7. Bharuch Bank of Baroda 8. Bhavnagar State Bank of India 9. Botad Dena Bank 10. Chhotaudepur Bank of Baroda 11. Dahod Bank of Baroda 12. Dangs Bank of Baroda 27 13. Devbhumi Dwarka Dena Bank 14. Gandhinagar Dena Bank 15. Gir Somnath State Bank of India 16. Godhra Bank of Baroda (Panchmahal) 17. Jamnagar State Bank of India 18. Junagadh State Bank of India 19. Kheda Bank of Baroda 20. Kutch (Bhuj) Dena Bank 21. Mahisagar Bank of Baroda 22. Mehsana Dena Bank 23. Morbi State Bank of India 24. Narmada Bank of Baroda 25. Navsari Bank of Baroda 26. Patan Dena Bank 27. Porbandar State Bank of India 28. Rajkot State Bank of India 29. Sabarkantha Dena Bank 30. Surat Bank of Baroda

31. Surendranagar State Bank of India 32. Tapi Bank of Baroda 33. Valsad Bank of Baroda 8 Haryana Punjab National Bank 1. Ambala Punjab National Bank 2. Bhiwani Punjab National Bank 3. Faridabad Syndicate Bank 4. Fatehabad Punjab National Bank 5. Gurgaon Syndicate Bank 6. Hisar Punjab National Bank 7. Jhajjar Punjab National Bank 8. Jind Punjab National Bank 9. Kaithal Punjab National Bank 10. Karnal Punjab National Bank 11. Kurukshetra Punjab National Bank 12. Mahendragarh Punjab National Bank 13. Mewat Syndicate Bank 14. Palwal Oriental Bank of Commerce 15. Panchkula Punjab National Bank 16. Panipat Punjab National Bank 17. Rewari Punjab National Bank 18. Rohtak Punjab National Bank 19. Sirsa Punjab National Bank 20. Sonepat Punjab National Bank 21. Yamunanagar Punjab National Bank 9 Himachal UCO Bank 1. Bilaspur UCO Bank Pradesh 2. Chamba State Bank of India 3. Hamirpur Punjab National Bank 28 4. Kangra Punjab National Bank (Dharamshala) 5. Kinnaur (Peo) Punjab National Bank

6. Kullu Punjab National Bank 7. Lahaul & Spiti State Bank of India (Kelyong) 8. Mandi Punjab National Bank 9. Shimla UCO Bank 10. Sirmaur UCO Bank 11. Solan UCO Bank 12. Una Punjab National Bank 10 Jammu & The Jammu & Kashmir 1. Anantnag J & K Bank Ltd. Kashmir Bank Ltd. 2. Bandipora J & K Bank Ltd. 3. Budgam J & K Bank Ltd. 4. Baramulla J & K Bank Ltd. 5. Doda State Bank of India 6. Ganderbal J & K Bank Ltd. 7. Jammu State Bank of India 8. Kargil State Bank of India 9. Kathua State Bank of India 10. Kishtwar State Bank of India 11. Kulgam J & K Bank Ltd. 12. Kupwara J & K Bank Ltd. 13. Ladakh (Leh) State Bank of India 14. Poonch J & K Bank Ltd. 15. Pulwama J & K Bank Ltd. 16. Rajouri J & K Bank Ltd. 17. Ramban State Bank of India 18. Reasi State Bank of India 19. Samba State Bank of India 20. Shopian J & K Bank Ltd. 21. Srinagar J & K Bank Ltd. 22. Udhampur State Bank of India 11 Jharkhand Bank of India 1. Bokaro Bank of India 2. Chatra Bank of India 3. Deoghar State Bank of India

4. Dhanbad Bank of India 5. Dumka Allahabad Bank 6. East Singhbhum Bank of India 7. Garhwa State Bank of India 8. Giridih Bank of India 9. Godda Allahabad Bank 10. Gumla Bank of India 11. Hazaribag Bank of India 12. Jamtara State Bank of India 13. Khunti Bank of India 14. Koderma Bank of India 29 15. Letehar State Bank of India 16. Lohardaga Bank of India 17. Pakur State Bank of India 18. Palamu State Bank of India 19. Ramgarh Bank of India 20. Ranchi Bank of India 21. Sahibganj State Bank of India 22. Seraikela- Bank of India Kharsawan 23. Simdega Bank of India 24. West Singhbhum Bank of India 12 Karnataka Syndicate Bank 1. Bagalkot Syndicate Bank 2. Bangalore (Rural) Canara Bank 3. Bangalore (Urban) Canara Bank 4. Belgaum Syndicate Bank 5. Bellary Syndicate Bank 6. Bidar State Bank of India 7. Bijapur Syndicate Bank 8. Chamrajanagar State Bank of Mysore 9. Chikballapur Canara Bank 10. Chickmagalur Corporation Bank 11. Chitradurga Canara Bank 12. Dakshin Canara Syndicate Bank

13. Davangere Canara Bank 14. Dharwad Vijaya Bank 15. Gadag State Bank of India 16. Gulbarga State Bank of India 17. Hassan Canara Bank 18. Haveri Vijaya Bank 19. Kodagu Corporation Bank 20. Kolar Canara Bank 21. Koppal State Bank of Hyderabad 22. Mandya Vijaya Bank 23. Mysore State Bank of Mysore 24. Raichur State Bank of Hyderabad 25. Ramanagara Corporation Bank 26. Shimoga Canara Bank 27. Tumkur State Bank of Mysore 28. Udupi Syndicate Bank 29. Uttar Canara Syndicate Bank 30. Yadgir State Bank of India 13 Kerala Canara Bank 1. Alappuzha State Bank of Travancore 2. Ernakulam Union Bank of India 3. Idukki Union Bank of India 4. Kannur Syndicate Bank 30 5. Kasaragod Syndicate Bank 6. Kollam Indian Bank 7. Kottayam State Bank of Travancore 8. Kozhikode Canara Bank 9. Malappuram Canara Bank 10. Palakkad Canara Bank 11. Pathanamthitta State Bank of Travancore 12. Thrissur Canara Bank 13. Thiruvananthapuram Indian Overseas Bank

14. Wayanad Canara Bank (Kalepetta) 14 Madhya Central Bank of India 1. Agar-Malwa Bank of India Pradesh 2. Alirajpur Bank of Baroda 3. Anuppur Central Bank of India 4. Ashoknagar State Bank of India 5. Balaghat Central Bank of India 6. Barwani Bank of India 7. Betul Central Bank of India 8. Bhind Central Bank of India 9. Bhopal Bank of India 10. Burhanpur Bank of India 11. Chhatarpur State Bank of India 12. Chhindwara Central Bank of India 13. Damoh State Bank of India 14. Datia Punjab National Bank 15. Dewas Bank of India 16. Dhar Bank of India 17. Dindori Central Bank of India 18. East Nimar Bank of India (Khandwa) 19. Guna State Bank of India 20. Gwalior Central Bank of India 21. Harda State Bank of India 22. Hoshangabad Central Bank of India 23. Indore Bank of India 24. Jabalpur Central Bank of India 25. Jhabua Bank of Baroda 26. Katni State Bank of India 27. Mandla Central Bank of India 28. Mandsaur Central Bank of India 29. Morena Central Bank of India

30. Narsinghpur Central Bank of India 31. Neemuch State Bank of India 32. Panna State Bank of India 33. Raisen Central Bank of India 34. Rajgarh Bank of India 31 35. Ratlam Central Bank of India 36. Rewa Union Bank of India 37. Sagar Central Bank of India 38. Satna Allahabad Bank 39. Seoni Central Bank of India 40. Shahdol Central Bank of India 41. Shajapur Bank of India 42. Sheopur Kala State Bank of India 43. Shivpuri State Bank of India 44. Sidhi Union Bank of India 45. Sihore Bank of India 46. Singrauli Union Bank of India 47. Tikamgarh State Bank of India 48. Ujjain Bank of India 49. Umaria State Bank of India 50. Vidisha State Bank of India 51. West Nimar Bank of India (Khargone) 15 Maharashtra Bank of Maharashtra 1. Ahmednagar Central Bank of India 2. Akola Central Bank of India 3. Amravati Central Bank of India 4. Aurangabad Bank of Maharashtra 5. Beed State Bank of India 6. Bhandara Bank of India 7. Buldhana Central Bank of India 8. Chandrapur Bank of India

9. Dhule Central Bank of India 10. Gadchiroli Bank of India 11. Gondia Bank of India 12. Hingoli State Bank of India 13. Jalgaon Central Bank of India 14. Jalna Bank of Maharashtra 15. Kolhapur Bank of India 16. Latur State Bank of India 17. Mumbai Bank of India 18. Mumbai Suburban Bank of India 19. Nagpur Bank of India 20. Nanded State Bank of India 21. Nandurbar State Bank of India 22. Nashik Bank of Maharashtra 23. Osmanabad State Bank of India 24. Parbhani State Bank of India 25. Pune Bank of Maharashtra 26. Raigad Bank of India 27. Ratnagiri Bank of India 28. Sangli Bank of India 29. Satara Bank of Maharashtra 32 30. Sindhudurg Bank of India 31. Solapur Bank of India 32. Thane Bank of Maharashtra 33. Wardha Bank of India 34. Washim State Bank of India 35. Yavatmal Central Bank of India 16 Manipur State Bank of India 1. Bishnupur United Bank of India 2. Chandel State Bank of India 3. Churachandpur State Bank of India 4. Imphal East United Bank of India

5. Imphal West State Bank of India 6. Senapati State Bank of India 7. Temenglong United Bank of India 8. Thoubal State Bank of India 9. Ukhrul United Bank of India 17 Meghalaya State Bank of India 1. East Garo hills State Bank of India 2. East Jaintia Hills State Bank of India 3. East Khasi Hills State Bank of India 4. Jaintia Hills State Bank of India 5. North Garo Hills State Bank of India 6. Ri Bhoi State Bank of India 7. South Garo Hills State Bank of India 8. South West Garo State Bank of India Hills 9. South West Khasi State Bank of India Hills 10. West Garo hills State Bank of India 11. West Khasi Hills State Bank of India 18 Mizoram State Bank of India 1. Aizawal State Bank of India 2. Champhai State Bank of India 3. Chhimtuipui Saiha State Bank of India 4. Kolasib State Bank of India 5. Lawngtlai State Bank of India 6. Lunglei State Bank of India 7. Mamit State Bank of India 8. Serchhip State Bank of India 19 Nagaland State Bank of India 1. Dimapur State Bank of India

2. Kiphire State Bank of India 3. Kohima State Bank of India 4. Longleng State Bank of India 5. Mokokchung State Bank of India 6. Mon State Bank of India 7. Peren State Bank of India 8. Phek State Bank of India 9. Tuensang State Bank of India 10. Wokha State Bank of India 11. Zunheboto State Bank of India 33 20 Odisha UCO Bank 1. Angul UCO Bank 2. Balasore UCO Bank 3. Bargah State Bank of India 4. Bhadrak UCO Bank 5. Bolangir (Balangir) State Bank of India 6. Boudh State Bank of India 7. Bough-Kandhamal State Bank of India 8. Cuttack UCO Bank 9. Deogarh State Bank of India 10. Dhenkanal UCO Bank 11. Gajapati Andhra Bank 12. Ganjam Andhra Bank 13. Jagatsinghpur UCO Bank 14. Jajpur State Bank of India 15. Jharsuguda State Bank of India 16. Kalahandi State Bank of India 17. Kendrapara State Bank of India 18. Keonjhar Bank of India 19. Khorda State Bank of India 20. Koraput State Bank of India 21. Malkangiri State Bank of India 22. Mayurbhanj Bank of India

23. Naarangpur State Bank of India 24. Nuapada State Bank of India 25. Nayagarh State Bank of India 26. Puri UCO Bank 27. Rayagada State Bank of India 28. Sambalpur State Bank of India 29. Sonepur State Bank of India 30. Sundargarh State Bank of India 21 Punjab Punjab National Bank 1. Amritsar Punjab National Bank 2. Barnala State Bank of Patiala 3. Bhatinda State Bank of Patiala 4. Faridkot Punjab & Sind Bank 5. Fategarh Sahib State Bank of Patiala 6. Fazilka Punjab National Bank 7. Ferozepur Oriental Bank of Commerce 8. Gurdaspur Punjab National Bank 9. Hoshiarpur Punjab National Bank 10. Jalandhar UCO Bank 11. Kapurthala Punjab National Bank 12. Ludhiana Punjab & Sind Bank 13. Mansa State Bank of Patiala 14. Moga Punjab & Sind Bank 15. Muktsar State Bank of Patiala 16. Nawanshahr Punjab National Bank 34 17. Pathankot Punjab National Bank 18. Patiala State Bank of Patiala 19. Ropar UCO Bank 20. Sahibzada Ajit Punjab National Bank Singh Nagar (Mohali) 21. Sangrur State Bank of Patiala

22. Tarn Taran Punjab National Bank 22 Rajasthan Bank of Baroda 1. Ajmer Bank of Baroda 2. Alwar Punjab National Bank 3. Banswara Bank of Baroda 4. Baran Central Bank of India 5. Barmer State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 6. Bharatpur Punjab National Bank 7. Bhilwara Bank of Baroda 8. Bikaner State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 9. Bundi Bank of Baroda 10. Chittorgarh Bank of Baroda 11. Churu Bank of Baroda 12. Dausa UCO Bank 13. Dholpur Punjab National Bank 14. Dungarpur Bank of Baroda 15. Hanumangarh State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 16. Jaipur UCO Bank 17. Jaisalmer State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 18. Jalore State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 19. Jhalawar Central Bank of India 20. Jhunjhunu Bank of Baroda 21. Jodhpur UCO Bank 22. Kirauli Bank of Baroda 23. Kota Central Bank of India 24. Nagaur UCO Bank 25. Pali State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 26. Pratapgarh Bank of Baroda 27. Rajsamand State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 28. Sawai Madhopur Bank of Baroda 29. Sikar Punjab National Bank

30. Sirohi State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 31. Sri Ganganagar Oriental Bank of Commerce 32. Tonk Bank of Baroda 35 33. Udaipur State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 23 Sikkim State Bank of India 1. East Sikkim State Bank of India 2. North Sikkim State Bank of India 3. South Sikkim State Bank of India 4. West Sikkim State Bank of India 24 Tamil Nadu Indian Overseas Bank 1. Ariyalur State Bank of India 2. Chennai Indian Overseas Bank 3. Coimbatore Canara Bank 4. Cuddalore Indian Bank 5. Dharmapuri Indian Bank 6. Dindigul Canara Bank 7. Erode Canara Bank 8. Kanchipuram Indian Bank 9. Kanyakumari Indian Overseas Bank 10. Karur Indian Overseas Bank 11. Krishnagiri Indian Bank 12. Madurai Canara Bank 13. Nagapattinam Indian Overseas Bank 14. Namakkal Indian Bank 15. Nilgiris Canara Bank 16. Perambalur Indian Overseas Bank 17. Puddukottai Indian Overseas Bank 18. Ramanathapuram Indian Overseas Bank 19. Salem Indian Bank 20. Sivaganga Indian Overseas Bank 21. Thanjavur Indian Overseas Bank

22. Theni Canara Bank 23. Tiruchirapalli Indian Overseas Bank 24. Tirunelveli Indian Overseas Bank 25. Tiruppur Canara Bank 26. Tiruvallur Indian Bank 27. Tiruvannamalai Indian Bank 28. Tiruvarur Indian Overseas Bank 29. Tuticorin State Bank of India 30. Vellore Indian Bank 31. Viluppuram Indian Bank 32. Virudhunagar Indian Overseas Bank 25 Telangana State Bank of 1. Adilabad State Bank of Hyderabad Hyderabad 2. Hyderabad State Bank of Hyderabad 3. Karimnagar State Bank of Hyderabad 4. Khammam State Bank of Hyderabad 5. Mahabubnagar State Bank of India 6. Medak State Bank of India 36 7. Nalgonda State Bank of Hyderabad 8. Nizamabad State Bank of Hyderabad 9. Ranga Reddy State Bank of Hyderabad 10. Warangal State Bank of India 26 Tripura United Bank of India 1. Dhalai United Bank of India 2. Gomati United Bank of India 3. Khowai United Bank of India 4. North Tripura United Bank of India 5. Sepahijala United Bank of India 6. South Tripura United Bank of India

7. Unakoti United Bank of India 8. West Tripura United Bank of India 27 Uttarakhand State Bank of India 1. Almora State Bank of India 2. Bageshwar State Bank of India 3. Chamoli State Bank of India 4. Champawat State Bank of India 5. Dehradun Punjab National Bank 6. Haridwar Punjab National Bank 7. Nainital Bank of Baroda 8. Pauri Garwal State Bank of India 9. Pithoragarh State Bank of India 10. Rudraprayag State Bank of India 11. Tehri Garhwal (New State Bank of India Tehri) 12. Udham Singh Bank of Baroda Nagar 13. Uttar Kashi State Bank of India 28 Uttar Pradesh Bank of Baroda 1. Agra Canara Bank 2. Aligarh Canara Bank 3. Allahabad Bank of Baroda 4. Ambedkar Nagar Bank of Baroda 5. Auraiya Central Bank of India 6. Azamgarh Union Bank of India 7. Baghpat Syndicate Bank 8. Bahraich Allahabad Bank 9. Ballia Central Bank of India 10. Balrampur Allahabad Bank 11. Banda Allahabad Bank 12. Barabanki Bank of India 13. Bareilly Bank of Baroda 14. Basti State Bank of India

15. Bhim Nagar Syndicate Bank 16. Bijnor Punjab National Bank 17. Budaun Punjab National Bank 18. Bulandshahr Punjab National Bank 37 19. Chandauli Union Bank of India 20. Chhtrapati Sahuji Bank of Baroda Maharaj Nagar 21. Chitrakoot Allahabad Bank 22. Deoria Central Bank of India 23. Etah Canara Bank 24. Etawah Central Bank of India 25. Faizabad Bank of Baroda 26. Farukhabad Bank of India 27. Fatehpur Bank of Baroda 28. Firozabad State Bank of India 29. Gautam Buddha Syndicate Bank Nagar 30. Ghaziabad Syndicate Bank 31. Ghazipur Union Bank of India 32. Gonda Allahabad Bank 33. Gorakhpur State Bank of India 34. Hamirpur Allahabad Bank 35. Hardoi Bank of India 36. Jalaun Allahabad Bank 37. Jaunpur Union Bank of India 38. Jhansi Punjab National Bank 39. Jyotiba Phule Syndicate Bank Nagar (Amroha) 40. Kannauj Bank of India 41. Kanpur Dehat-Rural Bank of Baroda 42. Kanpur Nagar- Bank of Baroda Urban 43. Kansi Ram Nagar Canara Bank (Kasganj) 44. Kaushambi Bank of Baroda

45. Kushi Nagar Central Bank of India (Padrauna) 46. Lakhimpur-Kheri Allahabad Bank 47. Lalitpur Punjab National Bank 48. Lucknow Bank of India 49. Mahamaya Nagar Canara Bank (Hathras) 50. Maharajganj State Bank of India 51. Mahoba Allahabad Bank 52. Mainpuri Bank of India 53. Mathura Syndicate Bank 54. Mau (Mau Nath Union Bank of India Bahnjan) 55. Meerut Syndicate Bank 56. Mirzapur Allahabad Bank 57. Moradabad Syndicate Bank 38 58. Muzaffarnagar Punjab National Bank 59. Panchsheel Nagar Syndicate Bank 60. Pilibhit Bank of Baroda 61. Prabudh Nagar Punjab National Bank (Shamli) 62. Pratapgarh Bank of Baroda 63. Rae Bareli Bank of Baroda 64. Rampur Bank of Baroda 65. Saharanpur Punjab National Bank 66. Sant Kabir Nagar State Bank of India 67. Sant Ravidas Nagar Union Bank of India (Bhadohi) 68. Shahjahanpur Bank of Baroda 69. Shravasti Allahabad Bank 70. Siddharth nagar State Bank of India 71. Sitapur Allahabad Bank 72. Sonbhadra Allahabad Bank 73. Sultanpur Bank of Baroda

74. Unnao Bank of India 75. Varanasi Union Bank of India 29 West Bengal United Bank of India 1. Bankura United Bank of India 2. Birbhum UCO Bank 3. Burdwan UCO Bank 4. Cooch Behar Central Bank of India 5. Dakshin Dinajpur United Bank of India 6. Darjeeling Central Bank of India 7. Hooghly UCO Bank 8. Howrah UCO Bank 9. Jalpaiguri Central Bank of India 10. Kolkata State Bank of India 11. Malda United Bank of India 12. Murshidabad United Bank of India 13. Nadia United Bank of India 14. North 24 Parganas Allahabad Bank 15. Pashchim United Bank of India Medinapur 16. Purba Medinapur United Bank of India 17. Purulia United Bank of India 18. South 24 Parganas United Bank of India 19. Uttar Dinajpur United Bank of India 30 Andaman & State Bank of India 1. Nicobar Islands State Bank of India Nicobar Islands 2. North& Middle State Bank of India Andaman

3. South Andaman State Bank of India 31 Chandigarh Punjab National Bank 1. Chandigarh (Rural) Punjab National Bank 39 32 Dadra Nagar Dena Bank 1. Dadra Nagar Haveli Dena Bank Haveli 33 Daman & Diu Dena Bank 1. Daman State Bank of India 2. Diu State Bank of India 34 Delhi Oriental Bank of 1. Central Delhi Canara Bank Commerce 2. East Delhi Punjab National Bank 3. New Delhi Canara Bank 4. North Delhi Oriental Bank of Commerce 5. North East Delhi Punjab National Bank 6. North West Delhi Punjab National Bank 7. Shahdara Bank of Baroda 8. South Delhi State Bank of India 9. South East Delhi State Bank of India 10. South West Delhi State Bank of India

11. West Delhi Canara Bank 35 Lakshadweep Syndicate Bank 1. Lakshdweep Syndicate Bank 36 Puducherry Indian Bank 1. Puducherry Indian Bank 40 Annex II SLBC Website- Indicative List of contents Menu item Sub Menu Contents Ann ex SLBC as a coordinating forum for the development of About us Background the state and its functioning - Brief write up SLBC-Members SLBC members with their names and contact details II-1 Each district may be linked to the respective district website of GOI at NIC portal so as to get district State Profile Geographical Map details on clicking the respective district name Infrastructure Power, Transport, Roads & Rail etc Acreage under cultivation, Cropping pattern, Irrigation facilities, Farm mechanisation, allied activities, Dairy, Fisheries, Plantation, Horticulture Agriculture etc, Industrialisation , Status of MSE, Sickness of MSE, Industries Reasons, Rehabilitation Position of banked villages as compared to total Banking villages in each of the districts II-2 SLBC Schedule of SLBC meetings for the current calendar meetings Calendar of meetings year II-3 Details of SLBC meetings held with agenda and SLBC-Meetings held minutes II-4 Lead Bank Lead Banks-District Details of Lead banks with names of LDM and their Scheme wise contact details II-5 ACP-Targets Annual Credit Plan - Targets for the year II-6 ACP-Achievements Annual Credit Plan - Sector wise achievement II-7 CD Ratio Position of district wise CD ratio II-8 Brief description of each Central Government Govt Central Government sponsored programme. The Central Government Sponsored Sponsored sponsored scheme is to be linked to RBI/GoI Programmes programmes guidelines State Government Sponsored Brief description of each State Government programmes sponsored programme. Banking Banking Network- Bank wise position of number of banking outlets Network Summary bifurcated with branches, BCs and other modes II-9 Banking outlets- Branches-details District wise particulars of all branches II-10 Banking outlets-BCs- details District wise particulars of all BC outlets II-11 Banking outlets- District wise particulars of banking outlets through Other modes-details other modes II-12 Financial Bank wise position of savings and credit linked Inclusion SHG bank linkage number of SHGs II-13 FLCs District wise position of FLCs II-14 RSETIs District wise position of RSETIs II-15 Submission Submission of data by Lead Banks and controlling of data Web based interface office of banks to SLBC Link to RBI, NABARD, respective State Government, Links to related IBA, Banking Ombudsman, Banks and other related Links website websites 41 Annex II-1 SLBC-List of Members Updated as on ----- SR Name Designation Organisation Contact Details Remarks Tel email Address 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 42 Annex II-2 Banking services-Villages covered Quarter ended ----- SR District Name District Total no. of No. of villages which Remarks Code(BSR) Villages are having banking outlets(BR/BC/Other) 1 >2000 <2000 >2000 <2000 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

TOTAL 43 Annex II-3 SLBC -Calendar of meetings for the calendar year -------- SR Year Quarter Scheduled Date of Remarks meeting 1 dd.mm.yyyy 2 3 4 44 Annex II-4 SLBC - Details of meetings held SR SLBC Date of Attended by (Name & Minutes Scheduled Remarks meeting meeting- Designation) of the date of no.* Agenda meeting meeting as linked per calendar RBI Covenor GOI State minutes Bank Govt 1 dd.mm.yyyy minutes dd.mm.yyyy 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 * SLBC mee tings held after April 2 010 45 Annex II-5 Details of Lead Banks Quarter ended ----- SR District District Name of Name Designation Contact Details Remarks Name code(BS Lead of LDM R) Bank Tel email Address 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 46 Annex II-6 Annual Credit Plan-Targets for the year -------- District Name (Amt Rs. in thousand) SR Bank Agri MS Exp Edu Hou Soc Rene Other Prior Non Total Name cult ME ort cati sing ial wabl s ity- Priorit ure Cre on Infr e Subt y dit astr Ener otal uct gy ure 1 2 3 4 5 6 Commerci al Banks- Sub Total 1 2 3 RRBs- Sub Total 1 2 3 4 5 Cooperati ve banks- Sub Total All banks- Total 47 Annex II-7 Annual Credit Plan - Achievement Quarter ended ----- (Amt Rs. in thousand) S Bank Name Agric MS Exp Educ Hou Soc Rene Ot Prio Non Tota R ulture ME ort ation sing ial wabl her rity- Prio l Cre Infr e s Sub rity dit astr Ener tota - uct gy l ure 1 2 3 4 5 6 Commercial Banks-Sub Total 1 2 3 RRBs-Sub Total 1 2 3 4 5 Cooperative banks-Sub Total All banks- Total 48 Annex II-8 Credit Deposit Ratio Quarter ended ------- (Amt Rs. in thousands) SR District Name District code Deposit Credit CD Ratio Remarks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 49 Annex II-9 Banking Network-Summary Quarter ended ----- SR Bank Name No. of Banking Outlets Remarks 1 Branch BC Other Modes Total 2 3 4 5 6 Commercial Banks- Sub Total 1 2 3 RRBs-Sub Total 1 2 3 4 5 Cooperative Banks- Sub Total All banks-Total 50 Annex II-10 Particulars of Banking outlets- Branches Quarter ended ----- SR District District Block Locality/ Population Bank Branch Date of Contact Add Re Name Code(B Village classification Name Name opening Details res ma SR) ( M/U/SU/R) s rk s dd.mm. 1 yyyy 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 51 Annex II-11 Particulars of Banking outlets- BCs Quarter ended ----- SR District Block Locality/Village Population Bank Base Date of Name Tel Remarks Name classification Name Branch opening of of no. ( M/U/SU/R) Name BC outlet CSP of

CSP 1 dd.mm.yyyy 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 52 Annex II-12 Particulars of Banking outlets- Other modes Quarter ended ----- SR District Block Locality/ Population Bank Specify Date of Name Tel no. Remarks Name Village classification Name Type of opening of of ( M/U/SU/R) mode Contact Contact (Rural Official Official

ATM/ Mobile van/ Other 1 dd.mm.yyyy 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 53 Annex II-13 SHG bank linkage programme Quarter ended ----- (No. in actuals, Amt .Rs. in thousand) SR Bank Name Savings linked Credit Linked No. of Amount No. of Amount SHGs outstanding SHGs outstanding 1 2 3 4 5 6 Commercial Banks-Sub Total 1 2 3 RRBs-Sub Total 1 2 3 4 5 Cooperative Banks-Sub Total All banks-Total 54 Annex II-14 Position of FLCs Quarter ended ----- SR Name Location Sponsoring Date of Name of Contact Details Remarks of of FLCs Bank opening Contact District official 1 Tel email Address 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 55 Annex II-15 Position of RSETI Quarter ended ----- SR Name of Location Sponsoring Date of Name of Contact Details Remarks District of RSETI Bank opening Contact official 1 Tel email Address 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 56 Annex III

QUARTERLY REPORT Roadmap for providing banking services in every village having population below 2000 - Progress at quarter ended-------- Name of State/UT: Name of RBI Regional Office: S Name Name of Numb Out of Roadmap prepared for less than 2000, No. of villages where R of the Scheduled er of banking outlet opened upto the end of the reporting Quarter Distri Commerc allotte ct ial Banks d Branch BC Other Grand selected village es Fixed Visi Visits Visits BCs- modes Total = for s locatio ts once in more Sub 5+10+1 allotment ns ever a than total = 1 of villages y fortnig once in 6+7+8 +9 with less wee ht a 2000 k fortnig populatio ht n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Total 57 Annex IV LBS- MIS-I Statement showing Targets of Annual Credit Plans ( ACP) for the year ended ---------- Name of the State/Union Territory: (No. in actuals, Amount Rs. In thousands) Sr. No Categories Yearly Targets under ACP Number Amount 1 Priority Sector Agriculture = 1A(i)+1A(ii)+1A(iii)

1B 1B(i)+1B(ii)+1B(iii)+1B(iv)+1B(v) Micro Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(i) advances up to Rs. 5 crores) Small Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(ii) advances up to Rs. 5 crores) Medium Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(iii) advances up to Rs. 10 crores) 1B(iv) Khadi and Village Industries 1B(v) Others under MSMEs 1C Export Credit 1D Education 1E Housing 1F Social Infrastructure 1G Renewable Energy 1H Others 2 Sub total= 1A+1B+1C+1D+1E+1F+1G+1H 3 Loans to weaker Sections under Priority Sector 4 Non-Priority Sector 4A Agriculture Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (Service) 4B = 4B(i)+4B(ii)+4B(iii) Micro Enterprises (Service) (advances above Rs 5 4B(i) Crore) Small Enterprises (Service) (advances above Rs 5 4B(ii) Crore) Medium Enterprises (Service) (advances above Rs 4B(iii) 10 Crore) 58 4C Education 4D Housing 4E Personal Loans under Non-Priority Sector 4F Others 5 Sub-total = 4A+4B+4C+4D+4E+4F Total=2+5 N ote: Data needs to be grouped separately for scheduled commercial banks and other banks like State cooperative banks & DCCBs etc. The data of scheduled commercial banks need to be further grouped into public sector banks, private sector banks and Regional Rural Banks to know the bank group wise position. 59 Annex V

LBS- MIS-II Statement showing Disbursements and Outstanding for the quarter ended …………... Name of the State/Union Territory: (No. in actuals, Amount Rs. in thousands) Disbursements upto Outstanding upto the end of current the end of current Sr. quarter quarter No Sector Number Amount Number Amount 1 Priority Sector 1A Agriculture= 1A(i)+1A(ii)+1A(iii) 1A(i) Farm Credit 1A(ii) Agriculture Infrastructure 1A(iii) Ancillary Activities Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises = 1B 1B(i)+1B(ii)+1B(iii)+1B(iv)+1B(v) Micro Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(i) advances up to Rs. 5 crores) Small Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(ii) advances up to Rs. 5 crores) Medium Enterprises (Manufacturing + 1B(iii) Service advances up to Rs. 10 crores) 1B(iv) Khadi and Village Industries 1B(v) Others under MSMEs Export Credit

1C 1D Education 1E Housing 1F Social Infrastructure 1G Renewable Energy 1H Others 2 Sub total= 1A+1B+1C+1D+1E+1F+1G+1H Loans to weaker Sections under Priority 3 Sector 4 Non-Priority Sector 4A Agriculture Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 4B (Service)=4B(i)+4B(ii)+4B(iii) Micro Enterprises (Service) (advances 4B(i) above Rs 5 Crore) Small Enterprises (Service) (advances 4B(ii) above Rs 5 Crore) 4B(iii) Medium Enterprises (Service) (advances 60 above Rs 10 Crore) 4C Education 4D Housing Personal Loans under Non-Priority 4E Sector 4F Others 5 Sub-total=4A+4B+4C+4D+4E+4F Total=2+5 Note: Data needs to be grouped separately for scheduled commercial banks and other banks like State cooperative banks & DCCBs etc. The data of scheduled commercial banks need to be further grouped into public sector banks, private sector banks and Regional Rural Banks to know the bank group wise position. 61 Annex VI

LBS- MIS-III Statement showing Achievement vis-à-vis Targets for the quarter ended …………….. Name of the State/Union Territory: (No. in actuals, Amount Rs. in thousands) Achievement upto the end of the Sr. Yearly Targets under current quarter No Sector ACP (%) Number Amount Number Amount 1 Priority Sector 1A Agriculture= 1A(i)+1A(ii)+1A (iii) 1A(i) Farm Credit 1A(ii) Agriculture Infrastructure 1A(iii) Ancillary Activities Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises =

1B 1B(i)+1B(ii)+1B(iii)+1B(iv)+1B(v) Micro Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(i) advances up to Rs. 5 crores) Small Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(ii) advances upto Rs. 5 crores) Medium Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service 1B(iii) advances up to Rs. 10 crores) 1B(iv) Khadi and Village Industries 1B(v) Others under MSMEs 1C Export Credit 1D Education 1E Housing 1F Social Infrastructure 1G Renewable Energy 1H Others 2 Sub total= 1A+1B+1C+1D+1E+1F+1G+1H 3 Loans to weaker Sections under Priority Sector 4 Non-Priority Sector 4A Agriculture Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (Service)= 4B 4B(i)+4B(ii)+4B(iii) Micro Enterprises (Service) (advances above Rs 5 4B(i) Crore) Small Enterprises (Service) (advances above Rs 5 4B(ii) Crore) 4B(iii) Medium Enterprises (Service) (advances above 62 Rs 10 Crore) 4C Education 4D Housing 4E Personal Loans under Non-Priority Sector 4F Others 5 Sub-total=4A+4B+4C+4D+4E+4F Total=2+5 Note: Data needs to be grouped separately for scheduled commercial banks and other banks like State cooperative banks & DCCBs etc. The data of scheduled commercial banks need to be further grouped into public sector banks, private sector banks and Regional Rural Banks to know the bank group wise position. 63 Appendix List of Circulars SR Circular No. Date Subject 1 FIDD.CO.LBS.No.5673/02.01.001/2015-16 20.05.2016 Lead Bank Scheme- strengthening of Monitoring Information System (MIS) 2 FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.17/02.01.001/2015-16 14.01.2016 Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme – Seeding of Aadhaar in Bank Accounts- Clarification 3 FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.82/02.01.001/2015-16 31.12.2015 Roadmap for opening brick and mortar branches in villages with population more than 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled commercial bank 4 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.93/02.01.001/2013-14 1 4 . 0 3 .2014 Annual Credit Plans – Potential Linked Plan (PLPs) prepared by NABARD 5 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.11/02.01.001/2013- 09.07.2013 Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme 14 – Implementation - Guidelines 6 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.12/02.01.001/2012- 11.05.2013 Lead Bank Scheme – Assignment of 13 lead bank responsibility in Metro districts 7 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.75 /02.01.001/2012- 10.05.2013 Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme 13 – Implementation 8 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.68 /02.01.001/2012- 19.03.2013 Lead Bank Scheme – Strengthening of 13 Monitoring Information System 9 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.86/02.01.001/2011- 19.06.2012 Roadmap-Provision of banking 12 services in villages with population below 2000 10 RPCD.CO.LBS.B.C.No.68/02.01.001/2011- 29.03.2012 SLBC Website - Standardization of 12 information / data 11 RPCD.CO.LBS.B.C.No.67/02.01.001/2011- 20.03.2012 Lead Bank Scheme - District 2012 Consultative Committee (DCC) - Inclusion of Director of MSME-DI 12 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.60 /02.08.001/2011- 17.02.2012 Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of 12 public representatives like MP/MLA/ ZP Chiefs in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings 13 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.74/02.19.010/2010- 30.05.2011 Resolution of issues regarding 11 allocation of villages under Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) scheme and roadmap for providing banking services in villages with population above 2000 under Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) 14 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.44/02.19.10/2010-11 29.12.2010 Lead Bank Scheme – Conduct of State Level Bankers' Committee (SLBC)/Union Territory Level Bankers' Committee (UTLBC) meetings 15 RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.No.21/02.19.10/20 16.09.2010 High Level Committee to Review Lead 10-11 Bank scheme- Providing banking services in every village having 64 population of over 2000 16 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.15/02.19.10/2010-11 26.07.2010 Lead Bank Scheme - Revitalising SLBC Meetings 17 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.57/02.19.10/2009-2010 02.03.2010 Report of the High Level Committee to Review Lead Bank Scheme - Implementation of the Recommendations - Lead banks and SCBs 18 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.57/02.19.10/2009-2010 26.02.2010 Report of the High Level Committee to Review Lead Bank Scheme - Implementation of the Recommendations - SLBC Convenor banks 19 RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.No.43/02.19.10/20 27.11.2009 High Level Committee to review LBS- 09-10 Providing banking services in every village having population of over 2000 by March 2011 20 RPCD.LBS.CO.BC.No.111/02.13.03/2008- 02.06.2009 Sub-Committee of SLBC for Export 2009 Promotion 21 RPCD.LBS.CO.BC.No.79/02.01.01/2008- 30.12.2008 Inclusion of issues pertaining to MSME 2009 Sector in SLBC meeting 22 RPCD.LBS.CO.BC.No.33/02.18.02/2006-07 1 5 . 1 1 . 2 0 0 6 Lead Bank Scheme - Inclusion of National Horticulture Board as a permanent member of SLBC of the respective State 23 RPCD.LBS.BC.No.20/02.01.01/2006-07 3 0.08.2006 Financial Inclusion by extension of banking services with 'No Frills' accounts and issue of GCC 24 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.52/02.02.001/2005- 06.12.2005 Financing of projects under Agri clinics 06 & Agri Business Centres Scheme – Review at meetings 25 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.50/02.01.01/2005-06 0 6 . 1 2 . 2005 Participation in various fora under Lead Bank Scheme 26 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.47/02.01.001/2005- 09.11.2005 Credit Deposit Ratio - Implementation 06 of recommendations of expert group on CD Ratio 27 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.11/02.01.001/2005- 06.07.2005 Participation of MPs/Public 06 Representatives in DLRC meetings - Functions relating to Self Help Groups (SHGs) Credit Linkage Programme 28 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.93/02.01.001/2004- 11.04.2005 Rural lending - ACPs based on the 05 Potential Linked Plans (PLPs) prepared by NABARD 29 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.76/02.01.001/2004- 28.01.2005 Participation of private sector banks 05 under various fora under Lead Bank Scheme 30 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.62/02.01.001/2004- 08.12.2004 Rural lending - Service Area Approach 05 - Review - Relaxation in SAA 31 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.5/02.01.001/2004-05 1 6 . 0 7 . 2 0 0 4 Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of 65 Members of Parliament and Public Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings 32 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.56/02.01.001/2003- 20.12.2003 Credit Flow to Boost Economic Growth 04 33 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.14/02.01.001/2003- 29.07.2003 Convening DLRC meetings - Late 04 submission of reports by lead banks 34 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.59/02.01.001/2002- 06.01.2003 Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of 03 Members of Parliament and Public Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings 35 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.106/02.01.001/2001- 14.06.2002 Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of 02 Members of Parliament and Public Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings 36 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.85/02.01.001/2000- 09.05.2001 Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of 01 Members of Parliament and Public Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings 37 RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.81/02.01.001/2000- 27.04.2001 Lead Bank Scheme - Convening of 01 District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings on quarterly basis- Monitoring of 38 RPCD.LBS.BC.32/02.01.01/2000-01 03.11.2000 Lead Bank Scheme - Holding of District Level Review Committee Meeting 39 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.86/02.01.01/1996-97 16.12.1996 Inclusion of National Commission for Scheduled Castes/Tribes in State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs) 40 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.13/02.01.01/1996-97 19.07.1996 Inclusion of Representatives of Khadi and Village Industries Commission/Boards in SLBC/DCC 41 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.118/02.01.01/94-95 18.02.1995 Credit Deposit Ratio of Banks in Rural February 18, 1995 and Semi-urban Areas 42 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.112/LBC.34/88-89 28.04.1989 State Level Bankers' Committee - Meetings - 43 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.12/65/88-89 11.08.1988 Service Area Approach - Constitution of Block Level Bankers' Committees 44 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.100/55-87/88 22.04.1988 Lead Bank Scheme - District Credit Plan - Annual Action Plan 45 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.87/65-87/88 14.03.1988 Rural Lending - Service Area of Bank Branches 46 RPCD.No.LBS.BC.69/LBS.34-87/88 14.12.1987 Review of the Annual Action Plans by State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs) 47 RPCD.No.LBS.524/55-86/87 28.04.1987 Lead Bank Scheme - Preparation of District C

redit Plans/Annual Action Plans 48 RPCD.No.LBS.430/55/86-87 03.03.1987 Lead Bank Scheme - District Credit 66 Plans - Guidelines for Fourth Round 49 RPCD.No.LBC.363/1-84 02.11.1984 Integration of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) with the Performance Budgets of Bank Branches 50 RPCD.No.LBC.162/1-84 06.09.1984 Integration of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) with the Performance Budgets of Bank Branches 51 RPCD.No.LBC.135/55-84 30.08.1984 Lead Bank Scheme - Annual Action Plan for 1985 - Guidelines for Formulation of 52 RPCD.No.LBC.96/1-84 18.01.1984 Lead Bank Scheme - Appointment of Lead Bank Officer - District Co- ordinators 53 RPCD.No.LBC.739/1-83 04.08.1983 Recommendations of the Working Group to Review the Working of the Lead Bank Scheme 54 RPCD.No.3096/C.517-82/83 13.04.1983 Convenorship of the State Level Bankers' Committees 55 DBOD.No.BP.B.BC.74/C/462(E.9)-80 18.06.1980 Credit Deposit Ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas 56 DBOD.NO.TEP.20/C.517-77 02.02.1977 State Level Bankers’ Committee 57 DBOD.No.BD.2955/ C.168-70 11.08.1970 Lead Bank Scheme 58 DBOD.No.BD4327/ C.168-169 23.12.1969 Branch Expansion Programme- Allocation of Districts under the Lead Bank Scheme

