RBI/2017-18/26 DCM (FNVD) G – 4/16.01.05/2017-18 July 20, 2017 The Chairman/ Managing Director /Chief Executive Officer All Banks and Director of Treasuries of all States Dear Sir / Madam, Master Circular – Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Notes Please refer to the Master Circular DCM (FNVD) G-6/16.01.05/2016-17 dated July 20, 2016 consolidating the instructions issued till July 20, 2016, relating to Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Notes. The Master Circular has since been updated by incorporating the instructions issued till date and has been placed on the RBI website www.rbi.org.in. The Master Circular is a compilation of the instructions contained in the circulars issued by RBI on the above subject which are operational as on the date of this Circular. Yours faithfully, (P Vijaya Kumar) Chief General Manager Encl: Master Circular INDEX

CONTENTS Para Particulars No 1 Authority to Impound Counterfeit Notes 2 Detection of counterfeit notes 3 Impounding of Counterfeit notes 4 Issue of Receipt to tenderer 5 Detection of counterfeit notes – Reporting to Police and other bodies 6 Examination of Banknotes Before Issuing over Counters, Feeding ATMs and Remitting to Issue Offices of RBI 7 Designating Nodal Bank Officer 8 Establishment of Forged Notes Vigilance Cell at Head Office of Bank 9 Provision of Ultra-Violet Lamp and Other Infrastructure 10 Reporting of Data to RBI 11 Preservation of Counterfeit Notes Received from Police Authorities 12 Detection of Counterfeit Notes - Training of Staff Annex I Annex II Annex III Annex IV Annex V Annex VI Annex VII 1 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA DEPARTMENT OF CURRENCY MANAGEMENT MASTER CIRCULAR – 2017-18 Detection and Impounding of Counterfeit Notes Para 1- Authority to Impound Counterfeit Notes The Counterfeit Notes can be impounded by-

(i) All Banks (ii) All Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. (iii) Issue Offices of Reserve Bank of India. Para 2 - Detection of counterfeit notes Banknotes tendered over the counter / received directly at the back office / currency chest through bulk tenders should be examined for authenticity through machines. No credit to customer’s account is to be given for counterfeit notes, if any, detected in the tender received over the counter or at the back-office / currency chest. In no case, the counterfeit notes should be returned to the tenderer or destroyed by the bank branches / treasuries. Failure of the banks to impound counterfeit notes detected at their end will be construed as wilful involvement of the bank concerned in circulating counterfeit notes and penalty will be imposed. Para 3 - Impounding of counterfeit notes Notes determined as counterfeit shall be stamped as "COUNTERFEIT NOTE" and impounded in the prescribed format (Annex I). Each such impounded note shall be recorded under authentication, in a separate register. Para 4 - Issue of Receipt to Tenderer When a banknote tendered at the counter of a bank branch/back office and currency chest or treasury is found to be counterfeit, an acknowledgement receipt in the prescribed format (Annex II) must be issued to the tenderer, after stamping the note as in Paragraph 2 ibid. The receipt, in running serial numbers, should be authenticated by the cashier and tenderer. Notice to this effect should be displayed prominently at the offices / branches for information of the public. The receipt is to be issued even in cases where the tenderer is unwilling to countersign it. 2 Para 5 - Detection of Counterfeit Notes - Reporting to Police and other bodies The following procedure should be followed while reporting incidence of detection of counterfeit note to the Police: For cases of detection of counterfeit notes upto 4 pieces, in a single transaction, a consolidated report in the prescribed format (Annex III) should be sent by the Nodal Bank Officer to the police authorities or the Nodal Police Station, along with the suspect counterfeit notes, at the end of the month. For cases of detection of counterfeit notes of 5 or more pieces, in a single transaction, the counterfeit notes should be forwarded by the Nodal Bank Officer to the local police authorities or the Nodal Police Station for investigation by filing FIR in the prescribed format (Annex IV). A copy of the monthly consolidated report / FIR shall be sent to the Forged Note Vigilance Cell constituted at the Head Office of the bank (only in the case of banks), and in the case of the treasury, it should be sent to the Issue Office of the Reserve Bank concerned. Acknowledgement of the police authorities concerned has to be obtained for note/s forwarded to them both as consolidated monthly statement and FIR. If the counterfeit notes are sent to the police by insured post, acknowledgement of receipt thereof by the police should be invariably obtained and kept on record. A proper follow-up of receipt of acknowledgement from the police authorities is necessary. In case, any difficulty is faced by the Offices / Branches due to reluctance of the police to receive monthly consolidate statement / file FIRs, the matter may be sorted out in consultation with the Nodal Officer of the police authority designated to coordinate matters relating to investigation of counterfeit banknotes cases. The list of Nodal Police Station may be obtained from the respective Regional Office of Reserve Bank. In order to facilitate identification of people abetting circulation of counterfeit notes, banks are advised to cover the banking hall / area and counters under CCTV surveillance and recording and preserve the recording. Banks should also monitor the patterns / trends of such detection and suspicious trends/patterns should be brought to the notice of RBI/Police authorities immediately. The progress made by banks in detection and reporting of counterfeit notes to Police, RBI, etc. and problems thereof, should be discussed regularly in the meetings of various State Level Committees viz. State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC), Standing Committee on Currency Management (SCCM), State Level Security Committee (SLSC), etc. 3 The data on detection of counterfeit Indian notes at bank branches & treasuries should be included in the monthly Returns forwarded to the Reserve Bank Issue Offices as indicated in para 10 below. The definition of 'counterfeiting' in the Indian Penal Code covers currency notes issued by a foreign government authority as well. In case of suspected foreign currency note received for opinion from the police and government agencies, etc., they should be advised to forward the case to the Interpol Wing of the CBI, New Delhi after prior consultation with them. The Government of India has framed Investigation of High Quality Counterfeit Indian Currency Offences Rules, 2013 under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA),

1967. The Third Schedule of the Act defines High Quality Counterfeit Indian Currency Note. Activity of production, smuggling or circulation of High Quality Counterfeit Indian Notes has been brought under the ambit of UAPA, 1967. Para 6 - Examination of the Banknotes before Issuing over Counters, Feeding ATMs and Remitting to Issue Offices of the Reserve Bank The banks should re-align their cash management in such a manner so as to ensure that cash receipts in the denominations of ₹ 100 and above are not put into re- circulation without the notes being machine processed for authenticity. The said instructions shall be applicable to all bank branches, irrespective of the volume of daily cash receipt. Any non-compliance will be construed as violation of the Directive No.3158/09.39.00 (Policy)/2009-10 dated November 19, 2009 issued by the Reserve Bank. In order to obviate complaints regarding receipt of counterfeit notes through ATMs, and to curb circulation of counterfeits, it is imperative to put in place adequate safeguards/checks before loading ATMs with notes. Dispensation of counterfeit notes through the ATMs would be construed as an attempt to circulate the counterfeit notes by the bank concerned. Detection of counterfeits in chest remittances is also liable to be construed as wilful involvement of the chest branches concerned in circulating Counterfeit Notes and may attract special investigation by police authorities, and other action like suspending the operation of the chest concerned. Penalty at 100% of the notional value of counterfeit notes, in addition to the recovery of loss to the extent of the notional value of such notes, will be imposed under the following circumstances: 4 a) When counterfeit notes are detected in the soiled note remittance of the bank. b) If counterfeit notes are detected in the currency chest balance of a bank during Inspection / Audit by RBI In terms of circular No.DPSS.CO.PD2298/02.10.002/2011-12 dated June 20, 2012, the responsibility of ensuring the quality and genuineness of cash loaded at White Label ATMs would be that of the Sponsor Bank. Para 7 - Designating Nodal Bank Officer Each bank should designate Nodal Bank Officer, district-wise and notify the same to the concerned Regional Office of RBI and Police Authorities. All cases of reporting of counterfeit note detection as indicated in Para 5 should be through the Nodal Bank Officer. The Nodal Bank Officer will also serve as the contact point for all counterfeit note detection related activities. Para 8 - Establishment of Forged Notes Vigilance Cell at Head Office of Bank Each bank shall establish at its Head Office, a Forged Note Vigilance Cell to undertake the following functions: i. Dissemination of instructions issued by the Reserve Bank on counterfeit notes to bank’s branches. Monitoring the implementation of these instructions. Compilation of data on detection of counterfeit notes, and its submission to Reserve Bank, FIU-IND and National Crime Records Bureau as per extant instructions. Follow-up of cases of counterfeit notes, with police authorities / designated nodal officer. ii. Sharing of the information thus compiled with bank’s CVO and report to him / her all cases of acceptance / issue of counterfeit notes over the counters. iii. Conducting periodic surprise checks at currency chests where shortages/ defective /counterfeit notes etc. are detected. iv. Ensuring operation of Note Sorting Machines of appropriate capacity at all the currency chests / back offices and closely monitoring the detection of Counterfeit Notes and maintaining the record of the same. Ensuring that only properly sorted and machine examined banknotes are fed into the ATMs / issued over the counters and to put in place adequate safeguards, including surprise checks, both during the processing and in transit of notes. Forged Note Vigilance Cell shall submit status report on a quarterly basis covering the aforesaid aspects to the Chief General Manager, Department of Currency Management, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Amar Building, Fourth Floor, Sir P. M. Road, Fort, Mumbai 400 001/to (mail) and to the Issue office of the Regional office of Reserve Bank under whose jurisdiction the FNV Cell is functioning, within a fortnight from the conclusion of the quarter under report. The said report should be 5 sent by mail. No hard copy need be sent. In order to update the record of the addresses of the Forged Note Vigilance Cells, the bank shall furnish by e-mail, in the prescribed format (Annex V), the address etc. particulars to the Reserve Bank every year, as on 1st July. No hard copy need be sent. Para 9 - Provision of Ultra-Violet Lamp and Other Infrastructure With a view to facilitating the detection of counterfeit notes, all bank branches / identified back offices should be equipped with ultra-violet lamps / other appropriate banknote sorting / detection machines. In addition, all currency chest branches should be equipped with verification, processing and sorting machines and should be used to their optimum capacity. Such machines should conform to the guidelines on 'Note Authentication and Fitness Sorting Parameters' prescribed by the Reserve Bank in May 2010. The banks shall maintain a daily record of the notes processed through the Note Sorting machines, including the number of counterfeits detected. The banks should also consider providing at least one counting machine (with dual display facility) for public use at the counter. Para 10 - Reporting of Data to RBI By All Bank branches Data on counterfeit notes detected by all the branches of the bank shall be reported in the prescribed format, on a monthly basis. A statement (Annex VI) showing the details of counterfeit notes detected in the bank branches during the month shall be compiled and forwarded to the Issue Office of Reserve Bank concerned so as to reach them by 7th of the next month. Under Rule 3 of Prevention of Money Laundering Rules, 2005, Principal Officers of banks are also required to report information on cash transactions where forged notes have been used as genuine note to The Director, FIU-IND, Financial Intelligence Unit- India, 6th Floor, Hotel Samrat, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi-110021, within seven working days, by uploading the information on the FINnet Portal. Similarly, data on FICN detection is also to be uploaded on the web-enabled software of National Crime Records Bureau at their website. A “nil “report may be sent in case no counterfeit has been detected during the month. 6 Para 11- Preservation of Counterfeit Notes Received from Police Authorities All Counterfeit Notes received back from the police authorities/courts may be carefully preserved in the safe custody of the bank and a record thereof be maintained by the branch concerned. Forged Note Vigilance Cell of the bank shall also maintain a branch-wise consolidated record of such Counterfeit Notes. These Counterfeit Notes at branches should be subjected to verification on a half- yearly basis (on 31st March and 30th September) by the Officer-in- Charge of the bank office concerned. They should be preserved for a period of three years from the date of receipt from the police authorities. They may thereafter be sent to the concerned Issue Office of Reserve Bank of India with full details. Counterfeit notes, which are the subject matter of litigation in the court of law should be preserved with the branch concerned for three years after conclusion of the court case. Para 12 - Detection of Counterfeit Notes - Training of Staff It is necessary to ensure that the cash handling staff in banks and treasuries / sub- treasuries is fully conversant with the security features of a banknote. With a view to educating the branch staff on detection of counterfeit notes, the design and security features of all the banknotes shown in Annex VII have been supplied to all the banks / treasuries with instructions to display them prominently at the branches fo

r information of the public. Posters of the 2005-06 series of banknotes have also been supplied to bank branches for display at the branches. Details of security features of the New Design banknotes of ` 2000 and ` 500 are available at the link https://www.paisaboltahai.rbi.org.in/ Details of other banknotes are also available under ‘Know your Banknotes’ at that link. The Controlling Offices / Training Centers should also organise / conduct training programmes on the security features of banknotes for members of staff to enable detection of counterfeit notes at the point of receipt itself. The banks should ensure that all bank personnel handling cash are trained on features of genuine Indian bank notes. The Reserve Bank will also provide faculty support and training materials. 7 Annex I (Paragraph 3) Each banknote, which, on examination of various security features / parameters, is determined as a counterfeit one, shall be branded with a stamp "COUNTERFEIT BANKNOTE". For this purpose, a stamp with a uniform size of 5 cm x 5 cm with the following inscription may be used.

COUNTERFEIT BANKNOTE IMPOUNDED BANK / TREASURY/ SUB-TREASURY BRANCH / CURRENCY CHEST SIGNATURE DATE 8 Annex II (Paragraph 4) Format – Acknowledgement Receipt to be issued to the tenderer of counterfeit notes Name of the Bank / Treasury/ Sub-treasury: Address: Serial Number of the Receipt: Date: The note (s) described below received from…………………………….(Name and Address of the tenderer) is/are counterfeit and has/have therefore been impounded and stamped accordingly. Serial number of Denomination Parameter on which the note is the note deemed deemed as counterfeit as counterfeit Total number of counterfeit notes: (Signature of the Tenderer) (Signature of the counter staff) 9 Annex III (Paragraph 5) Consolidated Monthly Reporting for the month of ________ 1. Name of the Bank / District: 2. Name and Address of the Nodal Officer:

3. Detail of counterfeit notes: Date of Name of Details Denominations / Security features detection branch / of pieces / serial breached currency tenderer numbers chest 4. The counterfeit notes are enclosed. 5. Kindly acknowledge receipt. (Authorised signatory) Encl: 10 Annex- IV (Paragraph 5) Name of the Bank: District: Name and Address of the Nodal Bank Officer: Ref. No. Date: The Sr. Inspector of Police ___________Police Station, Dear Sir, Detection of counterfeit note/s – Request for investigation We enclose the following counterfeit notes detected in our office on ________. The details of the counterfeit notes are furnished below.

2. As the printing and/or circulation of forged Indian Currency Notes is an offence under Sections 489A to 489E of the Indian Penal Code, we request you to lodge FIR and conduct the necessary investigation. In case it is decided to file criminal proceedings in the court of law, you may first arrange to send the notes to any of the Note Printing Presses, Forensic Science Laboratories etc. in terms of the provisions of Section 292(1) and 292(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure) for examination. The expert opinion furnished may be produced in the court as evidence under Section 292 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The forged notes may please be returned to us after the completion of the investigation and/or proceedings in the court of law along with the detailed report of the investigation / decision of the court. Denominations/ Serial Notional Details of Name & Bank’s Number of number Value tenderer address of Entry No. pieces the branch /currency chest where detection took place

3.The counterfeit notes are enclosed. 4. Please acknowledge receipt. Yours faithfully, Authorised Signatory Encl : 11 Annex V (Paragraph 8) FORMAT FOR FURNISHING ADDRESS ETC. PARTICULARS OF FORGED NOTE VIGILANCE CELL (FNVC) TO RBI (TO BE FURNISHED BY E-MAIL ON 1ST JULY EVERY YEAR) REF: MASTER CIRCULAR DATED JULY1, 2012 ISSUED BY RBI NAME ADDRESS NAME AND TELEPHONE FAX E-mail OF OF FNVC DESIGNATION NO (WITH NO. Address of THE (WITH PIN OF OFFICER- CODE). (WITH the FNVC

BANK CODE) IN-CHARGE CODE) We note to intimate immediately the changes, if any, in the particulars furnished above Name of Authorised Official: Designation Date: NB: The completed format should be transmitted by e-mail, in MS-Excel on the following address- E-mail (No hard copy need be sent) 12 Annex VI (Paragraph 10) Name of the bank /District: Statement showing the details of counterfeit banknotes detected in the _______________ during the month of _______________ A. Details of counterfeit notes detected: Name of Type of Denomination-wise Details in Total pieces branch / detection pieces currency 10 20 50 100 500 500 1000 2000 chest Old New

FIR Non-FIR Pieces of notes processed B) Details of cases filed with police: Pending Sent to Returned by Pending with with Police Police during the Police the Police at at the the month the end of the beginning of under report month the month No. of cases No. of pieces NB: Each FIR lodged comprises one case. The total number of forged notes covered by the FIR may be indicated in each of the columns above. Forwarded to: -

1. The General Manager/Deputy General Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Issue Department, ____________ (Signature) Name & Designation of the Authorised Official 13 Annex VII (Paragraph 12) Designs of Bank Notes Issued by the Reserve Bank of India since 1967 Year Size Watermark Front Back I.Rs.10 notes 1967 137x6 Ashoka Pillar Purple colour. Numeral 10 in the Value of the note in 14 languages. 3mm centre. The oval seascape with country craft. 1968 -do- -do- Blue-black colour. Promise clause, -do- guarantee clause and signature RBI’s name in Hindi added. printed in bilingual. 1969 -do- -do- Blue Black colour. ‘Ten Rupees’ Mahatma Gandhi’s Portrait. instead of ‘Rupees Ten’. 1970 -do- Ashoka Pillar Hindi version of RBI incorporated in Bilingual seal incorporated with spinning place of English and vice versa. Hindi wheels. rendering of Guarantee clause, promise clause and Governor’s signature have been interchanged. सत्यमेव जयत े incorporated. Watermark window and numbering panel enlarged. 1975 -do- -do- Dark brown, umber and blue colour. Pale brown, Ochre blue and green Numeral ‘10’ printed in dark brown. colour. A circle with two Peacocks Intaglio printing. Languages scroll on on branch of a tree. Deer, horses, left and Ashoka Pillar emblem on bird and lotus. right. 1992 -do- -do- Overall colour scheme in pale pink, Shalimar garden magenta and yellow 1996 -do- Portrait of Overall colour scheme in mauve Intricate guilloche and floral Mahatma brown, orange and pink. Portrait of patterns with profiles of an Gandhi with Mahatma Gandhi. Embedded security elephant, rhinoceros and tiger’s multidirectional thread containing the words 'भारत RBI’ faces. Value of note in 15 Indian lines in the languages. readable on both sides when held watermark against light. window. 2006 -do- The portrait of Machine readable windowed Year of printing is incorporated at Mahatma demetalised clear text magnetic the printing stage on the reverse of Gandhi, the security thread with inscriptions the banknote. multidirectional 'Bharat' (in Hindi) and RBI which lines, and an fluoresces in yellow on both sides electrotype under UV light. (Generic). mark showing Width: 1.4 mm the denominational Dual coloured optical fibres. numeral 10 The small floral design printed both on appear in this the front (hollow) and back (filled up) section and of the note in the middle of the vertical these can be 14 viewed better band next to the Watermark has an when the accurate back-to-back registration so banknote is that the numeral appears as one held against when seen against the light. light. 2011 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to have year of printing on the In addition, ` symbol was introduced reverse. In addition, ` symbol was on the obverse of the banknote, on introduced on the reverse of the the top left and top right corner (along banknotes, on the top left and top with the denominational numeral). right corner (along with the denominational numeral). 2016 -do- -do- -do- In addition, the numerals in both the number panels of these banknotes will be in ascending size from left to right, while the first three alphanumeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size II. Rs.20 notes 1972 147X63 Ashoka Pillar Saffron colour. Ashoka Pillar emblem Bold lettering in Hindi appears mm on the right and language panel on centrally in a horizontal panel, the left side. flanked by figures 20 at the corner. Picture of Parliament House. On the left value in Indian languages. 1975 -do- Small Ashoka Red, blue, mauve and pale yellow Dry offset printing. Red, blue and Pillar with colour. Numerical 20 in dark mauve mauve colour. Chariot wheel of chain of on a light yellow lotus shaped design. Konark Sun temple at the centre. spinning Language scroll on the left and Watermark window in pale blue is wheels. Resin Ashoka Pillar emblem on right. The surrounded by an ornamental treated paper printing bleeds off on all sides but not design in perfect register with in corners, which are paper white. corresponding design on obverse Bilingual names, clauses and of the note. signature. 2001 -do- Mahatma The security thread totally embedded The central theme depicts the Gandhi Portrait with the letters "Bharat" (in Hindi) and Indian coastal line with coconut "RBI" The colour is predominantly grooves. The value of the note reddish orange. The Ashoka Pillar has appears in 15 languages in a been replaced by the Mahatma vertical panel in the left hand side. Gandhi's Portrait in dark red while the Ashoka Pillar has been shifted to the left side bottom corner and the size is smaller. The numeral 20, RBI seal, Mahatma Gandhi's Portrait, RBI Legend, Guarantee and Promise clauses, Governor's Signature and Ashoka Pillar inset are in intaglio. The words RBI and the numeral 20 in Micro letters appear alternatively behind the Mahatma Gandhi's 15 Portrait. An identification mark by way of a small vertical rectangle in raised form appears on the left side of the note to facilitate the visually impaired to identify the denomination of the note. The numbers in the number panel are printed in red. 2006 -do- The portrait of Machine readable windowed Year of printing is incorporated at Mahatma demetalised clear text magnetic the printing stage on the reverse of Gandhi, the security thread with inscriptions the banknote. multidirectional 'Bharat' (in Hindi) and RBI which lines, and an fluoresces in yellow on both sides electrotype under UV light (Generic). mark showing Width: 1.4 mm the denominational Dual coloured optical fibres. numeral 20 The small floral design printed both on appear in this the front (hollow) and back (filled up) section and of the note in the middle of the vertical these can be band next to the Watermark has an viewed better accurate back-to-back registration so when the that the numeral appears as one banknote is when seen against the light. held against light 2012 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to have year of printing on the In addition, ` symbol was introduced reverse. In addition, ` symbol was on the obverse of the banknote, on introduced on the reverse of the the top left and top right corner (along banknotes, on the top left and top with the denominational numeral). right corner (along with the denominational numeral). The numerals in both the number 2016 -do- -do- -do- panels will be in ascending size from left to right while the first three alpha- numeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size. The numeral “20”, RBI seal, Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait, RBI legend, Guarantee and promise clause, Governor’s signature, Ashoka Pillar emblem which were hitherto printed in intaglio (raised printing) are now being printed in offset (without any raised printing). Further, rectangular identification mark on the left of the banknote has been removed. While there is no change in the colour at the reverse, the colour at the obverse is lighter (due to removal of 16 intaglio printing). The vertical band on the right side of the Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait hitherto contained a latent image showing the denominational numeral “20”.The latent image was visible only when the banknote was held horizontally at eye level. This feature is no longer present. III. Rs.50 notes 1975 147X73 Ashoka Pillar Mauve colour with hues of blue green Mauve, brown and yellow colours. with chain of and purple. Numeral 50 in dark brown. Parliament House at the centre. mm wheels. Language scroll on left and Ashoka Watermark window in pale mauve, Pillar emblem on right. Printing surrounded by an ornamental bleeds off on all sides except at design, which is in perfect register corners. with corresponding design on the obverse. 1981 -do- -do- Intaglio-fast blue, yellow red. Ashoka Dry offset-yellowish brown and Pillar and languages in deep violet body in deep purple colour. colours, rest in deep green and brown Parliament House with National colours. सत्यमेव जयत े below Ashoka flag on top Pillar emblem. 1997 -do- Portrait of Y

ellow, blue and violet colour. A panoramic view of India’s Mahatma Ashoka Pillar replaced by Mahatma Parliament House with floral Gandhi with Gandhi Portrait in blue. Security patterns above and filigree multidirectional thread totally embedded inside the patterns on the sides. The value lines in the note the letters ‘भारत’ and 'RBI’. A of the note in 15 Indian languages. window. small black solid square on the left hand side of the watermark to help the visually impaired to identify the denomination of the note. 2005 -do- The portrait of Machine readable windowed Year of printing is incorporated at Mahatma demetalised clear text magnetic the printing stage on the reverse of Gandhi, the security thread with inscriptions the banknote. multidirectional ‘Bharat’ (in Hindi) and RBI which lines, and an fluoresces in yellow on both sides electrotype under U.V.light –width 1.4 mm. The mark showing Intaglio Printing i.e. raised prints is the more prominent in the name of the denominational Bank in Hindi and English, the numeral 50 Reserve Bank Seal, guarantee and appear in this promise clause, Ashoka Pillar Emblem section and on the left, RBI Governor’s signature. these can be A square in intaglio on the left of the viewed better watermark window with increased when the depth of engraving helps the visually banknote is impaired to identify the denomination. held against Optical fibres are in dual colour. The 17 light small floral design printed both on the front (hollow) and back (filled up) of the banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the watermark window has an accurate back-to-back registration so that the numeral appears as one when seen against the light. 2012 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to have year of printing on the In addition, ` symbol was introduced reverse. In addition, ` symbol was on the obverse of the banknote, on introduced on the reverse of the the top left and top right corner (along banknotes, on the top left and top with the denominational numeral). right corner (along with the denominational numeral). 2015 -do- -do- -do- -do- In addition, the numerals in both the number panels of these banknotes will be in ascending size from left to right, while the first three alphanumeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size The numeral ‘50’, RBI seal, Mahatma 2016 -do- - do- Gandhi’s portrait, RBI legend, -do- Guarantee and promise clause, Governor’s signature, Ashoka Pillar emblem which were hitherto printed in intaglio (raised printing) are now being printed in offset (without any raised printing). Further, square-shaped identification mark on the left of the banknote has been removed. While there is no change in the colour at the reverse, the colour at the obverse is lighter (due to removal of intaglio printing). The vertical band on the right side of the Mahatma Gandhi’s portrait hitherto contained a latent image showing the denominational numeral ’50’. The latent image was visible only when the banknote was held horizontally at eye level. This feature is no longer present. 18 IV Rs 100 notes 1967 157X7 Ashoka Pillar Blue colour. Numeral 100 appears Vertical panel of 14 Indian 3mm prominently in centre. Ashoka Pillar languages on left. Hirakud Dam in emblem on the right. the background in a circular frame. 1969 -do- -do- Blue colour and promise clause, Picture of Mahatma Gandhi in a Guarantee clause and Governor's sitting posture with Sevagram signature in bilingual. Ashram in the background in a circular frame. 1975 -do- Ashoka Pillar Intaglio deep blue with hues of blue, Intaglio deep blue and brown with spinning brown, pink and dark green. Numeral shade of corn, agricultural wheels. 100 in dark blue. Watermark window operations, Tea plantation and light blue. RBI's name, promise hydroelectric power project. clause, Guarantee clause and ‘Watermark’ window is surrounded Governor's signature in bilingual. by an ornamental design, which is Language scroll on left and Ashoka in perfect register with similar Pillar emblem on right. Printing bleeds design on the obverse. off on all sides except at corners. 1979 -do- -do- One side intaglio blue, red and deep Dry-offset. Black and maroon green, Tints of reddish and yellowish colours. Tint design in greenish green shade. सत्यमेव जयते below blue and brownish shades. Ashoka Pillar emblem. 1996 -do- Portrait of Printed with the combination of offset Central theme depicts a Mahatma and intaglio process. overall colour is panoramic view of the Gandhi with predominantly blue, grey and green. Kanchangunga range with floral multidirectional Portrait of Mahatma Gandhi. A patterns above and filigree lines in the windowed security thread partly visible patterns on the sides. The value watermark from the front but totally embedded of note appears in 15 languages window. inside. Letters ‘भारत’ and ‘RBI’ printed on the left hand side. on the thread. A small black solid triangle in intaglio on left hand side of the watermark to help the visually impaired to identify the denomination of the note. 2005 -do- The portrait of Machine-readable windowed Year of printing is incorporated at Mahatma demetalised clear text magnetic the printing stage on the reverse of Gandhi, the security thread with inscriptions the banknote. multidirectional ‘Bharat’ (in Hindi) and RBI on notes of lines, and an Rs.100 with exclusive colour shift. electrotype Colour of the thread shall shift from mark showing green to blue when viewed from the different angles. It will fluoresce in denominational yellow on the reverse and the text will numeral 100 fluoresce on the obverse under appear in this U.V.light –width – 2 m.m. section and The Intaglio Printing i.e. raised prints these can be is more prominent in the name of the viewed better Bank in Hindi and English, the when the Reserve Bank Seal, guarantee and banknote is 19 held against promise clause, Ashoka Pillar Emblem light. on the left, RBI Governor’s signature. A triangle in intaglio on the left of the watermark window with increased depth of engraving helps the visually impaired to identify the denomination. Optical fibres are in dual colour. The small floral design printed both on the front (hollow) and back(filled up) of the banknote in the middle of the vertical band next to the watermark window has an accurate back to back registration so that the numeral appears as one when seen against the light. 2011 -do- -do- -do- The banknotes will continue to have year of printing on the In addition, ` symbol was introduced reverse. In addition, ` symbol was on the obverse of the banknotes, on introduced on the reverse of the the top left and top right corner (along banknotes on the top left and top with the denominational numeral). right corner (along with the denominational numeral). 2015 -do- -do- -do- -do- In addition, the numerals in both the number panels of these banknotes will be in ascending size from left to right, while the first three alphanumeric characters (prefix) will remain constant in size. In addition, easy to identify markings for visually impaired in the form of four angular bleed lines on both left and right of the obverse side of banknotes. Increase in size of the identification mark (triangle) by 50 per cent. 20 V. Rs.500 notes – Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series Issued in the Mahatma Gandhi (New) The new theme is the Indian 2016 66mm Mahatma Series, the new ₹ 500 banknotes are heritage site Red Fort with the x150 Gandhi portrait different from the earlier specified Indian flag. mm and electrotype bank note (SBN) series in colour, size, (2000) The year of printing “2016” and watermarks theme, location of security features Swachh Bharat logo is printed on and design elements. the reverse. The colour of the note is stone grey. The 15 language panel is towards The orientation and relative position of the centre. the Mahatma Gandhi portrait has changed. The banknote also has features (intaglio printing of Mahatma Gandhi portrait, Ashoka Pilla

r emblem, bleed lines, circle with ₹ 500 in the right, and the identification mark) which enable the visually impaired person to identify the denomination. VI. Rs.2000/- notes – Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series Issued in the Mahatma Gandhi (New) The salient features are : 2016 66mm x Mahatma Series. 166 mm Gandhi portrait 1. Year of printing of the note on and electrotype The base colour of the note is the left (2000) magenta. The note has other designs, watermarks. 2. Swachh Bharat logo with slogan geometric patterns aligning with the overall colour scheme, both at the

3. Language panel towards the obverse and reverse. centre The salient features are : 4. Motif of Mangalayan depicting the country’s first venture into 1. See through register with interplanetary space. denominational numeral 2000 2. Latent image with denominational 5. Denominational numeral २००० in numeral 2000 Devnagari 3. Denominational numeral २००० in Devnagari 4. Portrait of Mahatma Gandhi at the centre 5. Micro letters ‘RBI’ and ‘2000’ on the left side of the banknote 6. Windowed security thread with inscriptions ‘भारत’, RBI and 2000 on banknotes with colour shift. Colour of the thread changes from green to blue 21 when the note is tilted 7. Guarantee Clause, Governor’s signature with Promise Clause and RBI emblem towards right 8. Denominational numeral with Rupee Symbol, ₹ 2000 in colour changing ink (green to blue) on bottom right 9. Ashoka Pillar emblem on the right Mahatma Gandhi portrait and electrotype (2000) watermarks

10. Number panel with numerals growing from small to big on the top left side and bottom right side. For visually impaired Intaglio or raised printing of Mahatma Gandhi portrait, Ashoka Pillar emblem, bleed lines and identity mark 11. Horizontal rectangle with ₹ 2000 in raised print on the right 12. Seven angular bleed lines on left and right side in raised print. 22

